WIMBLEDON, England — Roger Federer, tennis’s perennial sentimental favorite, will have to surrender that crown on Wednesday.
His opponent will be 772nd-ranked Marcus Willis, one of the most improbable men to play a second-round match at Wimbledon in many a full moon.
“I think it’s one of the best stories in a long time in our sport,” said Federer, who at 34 has been around long enough to know.
It was quite a Monday all around for rank outsiders as Iceland eliminated England to reach the quarterfinals of the European soccer championships. At least the English, who relish their underdogs (if perhaps not at the expense of their national honor), can take some small consolation from the 25-year-old Willis. He was charging 30 pounds an hour for private lessons and pondering a trans-Atlantic move to coach in Philadelphia this year before a new romance changed his mind and his story arc.
“It’s gotten out of hand; a little bit out of hand,” Willis said of the hoopla. “I’m enjoying it. Keep it rolling.”
After winning three matches in prequalifying to earn a wild card into the qualifying tournament at Wimbledon, Willis won three more matches to earn a spot in the granddaddy of all tennis tournaments.
On Monday, he beat 53rd-ranked Ricardas Berankis, 6-3, 6-3, 6-4, in the first round as plenty of his compatriots were getting barmy in the Wimbledon hinterlands of Court 17.
One suspects he will now get to play on an actual show court when he faces Federer, but first Willis needs to reconfirm his hotel reservation.
“I check out every single morning,” he said. “I mean, I’m not a heavy favorite for any match I’ve been playing.”
Federer and Willis — two men on extreme ends of the tennis food chain — have yet to meet.
“I don’t think he was at Tunisia F1 this year, so no I haven’t,” Willis said, referring to the futures circuit, which is the lowest level of men’s professional tennis. “As a junior, I walked past him. He was friendly, polite. But I’ve never had a conversation with him.”
But Federer, who likes to keep a wide-angle view of his sport and its emerging figures even in the midst of Grand Slam mania, certainly knows plenty about him now.
“I have followed it actually, even before I even saw him in my section of the draw,” Federer said. “This is the kind of stories we need in our sport.”
It is hard to argue considering what pro tennis has had to absorb in 2016, from corruption and match-fixing concerns to Maria Sharapova’s two-year doping suspension.
A lowly ranked player competing at Wimbledon is nothing new. The tournament has been handing out wild cards to promising and less promising Britons with rankings in the high triple digits for decades.
But winning a round is another matter, particularly when you are juggling teaching duties with playing duties.
Willis is the lowest-ranked men’s qualifier to reach the second round of a Grand Slam since the American Jared Palmer, who was ranked No. 923 when he played at the 1988 United States Open.
It should come as no surprise then that Willis’s favorite player is Goran Ivanisevic, the big-serving, unpredictable Croat who in 2001 became the only man ever to win Wimbledon as a wild card.
“I was at school; my mum wouldn’t tell me who won,” Willis said of the 2001 final. “I watched the video when I got home. That was kind of cruel of her.”
He continued: “I was watching the whole fifth set, couldn’t keep my eyes off it. It was a nervy, nervy last game. I was with him every step of the way.”
Guess who popped by to shake his hand in congratulations on Monday?
“He’s my hero,” Willis said of Ivanisevic. “I’m a bit, yeah.”
There was no need to finish the sentence to grasp what all this means to Willis. But at the risk of seeming as cruel as his mum, it seems very, very safe to say that there will be no repeat in 2016. Ivanisevic, after all, had already reached three Wimbledon finals before finally winning the big one.
Unless there is another slip near a bathtub from Federer, it is exceedingly difficult to see the crafty, left-handed Willis extending his run into the third round.
But what did get a bit lost on this day of the uber-underdog was the fact that Federer was far from the Federer of yore or even of last year on Centre Court. Although he defeated Guido Pella of Argentina in straight sets, Federer had to navigate tiebreakers in the first two sets to win, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (3), 6-3.
He also had to weather plenty of his own patchy play. There were missed targets and missed opportunities aplenty while Pella, not looking the least bit overawed, was often the more athletic and spectacular shot maker on the court in the first two sets.
But while Pella is a solidly constructed, Spanish-speaking left-hander with a whipping topspin forehand, there is no confusing him with Rafael Nadal, the Federer nemesis missing this Wimbledon with a wrist injury.
Pella is a 26-year-old with a world ranking of 51 whose career record on grass is now 0-4: quite a contrast with Federer’s 148-22.
Federer, a seven-time Wimbledon champion, will have to be a great deal sharper than this if he is to send any chills down Novak Djokovic’s spine in the top half of the draw.
Djokovic, the world No. 1 and two-time defending Wimbledon champion, has assumed Federer’s once-traditional role: playing the opening match on the pristine grass of Centre Court. He swept the first nine games before closing out James Ward of England, 6-0, 7-6 (3), 6-4.
By the time Federer arrived on the grass shortly after 6 p.m., there were already visible patches of wear, but at least he was there.
“When I woke up from the operation in February, my first goal was to be in shape for Wimbledon,” he said.
It has been a most trying year by his standards, beginning with that slip near the bathtub in Australia that left him with a torn meniscus in his knee and the need to have surgery for the first time in his career. “One stupid move, the season’s been completely different than what I expected it to be,” he said.
He has played little and has yet to win a title, not even on grass after skipping the French Open to maximize his chances and restore himself to full health for Wimbledon and the rest of the year’s major challenges.
“Roger still has to get a lot better on movement and shot selection,” said Brad Gilbert, a former top coach who is now an ESPN analyst. “But he has a good draw to get more confidence going into the second week.”
His next chance to build momentum comes against Willis, who will surely feel like a winner at this stage whatever the outcome.
Asked to describe the difference between Federer’s game and his, Willis started to give it a go but then suddenly realized what he was doing.
“I didn’t think I’d be answering these questions in a million years,” he said.

