Tejay van Garderen was in third place over all in the Tour de France a year ago, with just a handful of stages between him and a podium place in Paris, when he pulled to the side of the road and climbed into his team car.
A respiratory infection he had been fighting for days had forced him out of the race.
It was a bitter disappointment not only for van Garderen, who has twice finished fifth in the Tour, cycling’s marquee race, but also for American fans waiting for someone to step into the void left by Lance Armstrong.
Perhaps this is the year that will finally happen.
Van Garderen will join four other Americans on the start line Saturday in Mont-St.-Michel, all of them with the ability to stir things up. In fact, van Garderen and the Australian Richie Porte were picked as leaders of the BMC Racing Team, which means that van Garderen, a 27-year-old from Tacoma, Wash., will have plenty of support.
“I’ve already raced the Tour de France a couple of times with most of these guys, so I couldn’t be happier to line up with them once again,” van Garderen said. “I’m in great shape. I’m really motivated.”
Van Garderen withdrew his name from consideration for the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, citing concerns about the Zika virus, with his wife due to give birth in October. That means the Tour is his sole priority.
He will be joined at the Tour by his BMC teammate Brent Bookwalter, who will be part of the two-man United States squad in Rio. Cannondale Pro Cycling also has two Americans, Lawson Craddock and Alex Howes, while their teammate Andrew Talansky is skipping the race because of family concerns and a chronic sinus infection.
Peter Stetina, with Trek-Segafredo, rounds out the American contingent. Stetina, who sustained career-threatening injuries in a crash in the Tour of the Basque Country last year, may have the best feel-good story in the peloton.
There are two more Americans than there were a year ago, when the fewest in nearly two decades made it to the start. But the total down from 10 just five years ago.
For various reasons, several of America’s brightest stars are joining Talansky on the sideline.
Taylor Phinney is not part of BMC’s roster, setting his sights instead on the Olympics, where he has a chance to win a medal in the time trial. Tyler Farrar, a stage winner in 2011, was passed over by his Dimension Data team, and Ben King was skipped over by Cannondale despite a strong performance in the Tour of California.
Still, those on the start list for the Tour have enough ability to make good on their aspirations.
Van Garderen is a legitimate podium threat, especially after his recent stage win in the Tour of Switzerland. Bookwalter has a chance to win from a breakaway. Stetina will focus on helping his Dutch teammate Bauke Mollema in the hills but proved at the Tour of California that he could pull a surprise on any uphill stage.
Craddock, a bright-eyed Texan, and Howes, who, like Stetina, grew up in the cycling hotbed near Boulder, Colo., are intriguing youngsters who believe they have something to prove.
“With it being my first Tour, it’s hard to place certain expectations on myself,” Craddock said. “Just lining up on the start line of the Tour is a dream come true, so if I were able to wear a jersey there, then I think my mind would just explode. That being said, I’m a born and bred bike racer, and I line up to every race I do with dreams of winning. I’m not just going to the Tour to be pack fodder.”
Jonathan Vaughters, who founded the United States-based Cannondale team, said that the French veteran Pierre Rolland would be the pivot point of his squad. But he did not dismiss Craddock, 24, or Howes, 28, especially given their charmingly cavalier attitudes.
“The anticipation of this race is huge,” Craddock said. “I imagine the few days leading up to the start, I’ll have a few more nerves than normal, but at the end of the day, it’s just another bike race. The neutral flag goes down on the first stage, I’m sure those nerves will be replaced with pure adrenaline.”

