PARIS — It was the first Sunday of the Miami Open in March, and the French photographer Corinne Dubreuil left the media workroom to eat a quick lunch.
When she returned to her desk, both her cameras were gone. All that remained were the two long lenses.
“At first I thought it was a joke,” Dubreuil said. “But then it was like someone had cut off my hands.”
In her 26 years on the tennis circuit, Dubreuil said, she had never had any equipment stolen. In this case, the camera bodies were missing from a room that, in theory, only accredited personnel had access to during the tournament.
“The robbers knew what they were doing,” she said. “The lenses were too big to put in a bag and walk out with. But the camera bodies were small enough.”
Worse yet was the financial toll. Each body was worth about 6,000 euros, or nearly $6,800. To replace even one of them was far beyond Dubreuil’s financial means: She is a freelancer at a time when freelance tennis photography is no road to fortune.
She had no insurance for the cameras because she said the annual cost, with her peripatetic lifestyle, was nearly as much as the cost of the equipment. “In France, there are practically no photographers who are insured, because it’s so expensive,” she said.
Miami tournament officials were not prepared to compensate her, and they had no legal obligation to do so. They cited several factors, including the fact that Dubreuil had left her equipment unsecured and unattended and that a locker was available elsewhere in the building.
“I went to see the tournament director, Adam Barrett, and he said it was not his fault,” Dubreuil said. “Fine, I said. But you could have a heart, no? And he said: ‘No, we are not responsible. The security is very good.’ And I said, ‘I used to love your tournament, and I will never come back.’ So I left his office in tears.”
Investigations at the tournament site by security personnel and local police officers did not turn up the missing cameras. Their investigations were hampered by the lack of a closed-circuit video system in the media room.
“We do not own the facility,” said Mary Jane Orman, a spokeswoman for IMG/WME, which operates the event and owns the tournament license. “Even though we have asked the county about installing a system, it has not been done to this point.”
Demoralized, Dubreuil laid out the situation in posts on her blog, which she said typically gets 100 to 200 visits per tournament. After her post from Miami, she said the blog got 11,000 visits in 24 hours. One of those reading was Alizé Cornet, a leading French player.
Cornet, 26, was home in France, off the circuit with a back problem. She has known and liked Dubreuil since her early days on tour. Dubreuil had followed her for a cover article for L’Équipe Magazine in 2008, when Cornet broke into the top 20 at age 18.
“I got to know someone who truly had her heart on her sleeve; such a generous spirit and a real bon vivant,” Cornet said. “We stayed in contact as I continued my career and she continued her own, but she has always been someone I enjoyed seeing on tour.
“When I learned what happened in Miami, I was first and foremost very sad for her. It may not be the ideal comparison, but it’s like if someone stole all my rackets and I couldn’t afford to buy any replacements.”
Cornet mentioned what had happened to Dubreuil to her boyfriend. He suggested that she organize “une cagnotte,” a French term for a group fund.
“Then he went to bed,” Cornet said. But she did not, even though it was after midnight. She stayed up thinking, then stayed up creating an account on a French fund-raising website, then posted links to it on her social media accounts.
“It’s true that in the tennis world we are all a bit egocentric, a bit focused on our own little thing, our own little concerns, and we sometimes forget a bit to open up to others,” Cornet said.
Within two days, her initiative had raised more than €3,000.
“There are lots of disadvantages to social media, lots of stupidities that get passed around and lots of people who criticize us players on social media,” she said. “But for things like this, it’s total magic. Without this, it would have taken so much longer. Passing a hat among the players might have worked as well, but what was so cool about this was that it touched a wide group of people.”
The final total before the campaign ended: €7,689 from 153 donors, including young French players like Kristina Mladenovic and Lucas Pouille. A staff photographer for a major North American media outlet would have been bound by ethics rules and thus unable to accept donations from players they covered. But Dubreuil said that had never entered her thinking, and that she felt nothing but gratitude.
“As a freelancer, you never feel like you’re secure,” she said. “You feel like you have to struggle all the time just to do your job, and that’s why what happened in Miami hit me so hard. Something broke in me, and I was wondering if it was worth it to keep up the struggle. But that’s also why I was so deeply touched by this. It was a nightmare that became a fairy tale.”
Or at least a feel-very-good story. Dubreuil was able to buy her first new camera body in April, and has recently been able to purchase a second with additional help from direct donations. She was back on duty at Roland Garros for the French Open this spring and at Wimbledon this week.
“Every day at Roland Garros, I was getting stopped in the alleys, ‘Hey Corinne, could you buy your new cameras?’ ” she recalled, choking up. “I was shooting on Court No. 2, and someone in the stands yelled out, ‘I put in 50 euros for you.’ It really hit me, and the way I see it now is it’s not just me behind the camera. It’s 160 people behind the camera. We’re all part of it now.”

