NEW LONDON, Conn. — Between forkfuls of pad Thai, chicken and tofu, 20 Connecticut College faculty members listened as Michael Reder talked about teaching.
“The research shows that students love it when we share what we're passionate about,” said the animated Mr. Reder, whose enthusiasm for teaching is infectious. “Students often say they want to be a name and known to the faculty. But what's interesting is how much they also want to know about you. They want to hear about what you do and why you do it.”
The chatter and clatter of plates and silverware dims. The audience — a cross-section of younger and older professors from across disciplines — begins to turn its attention fully toward the 6-foot-2 figure at the head of the table.
Professor Reder, who holds a Ph.D. in English, is the director of the Joy Shechtman Mankoff Center for Teaching & Learning at this private 105-year-old liberal arts college. This session, “What Motivates Our Students?” is the last of his monthly “Talking Teaching” lunches for the spring 2016 semester. Other topics have included “What Do We Know About Our First-Year Students?” and “Recognizing Student Strengths to Ensure Full Participation.”
The faculty at the session appeared to be hungry for something more than Thai food.
“Think about your classes as we approach the end of the semester,” implored Dr. Reder. “What's worked? What hasn't? Is there something you can do differently next year to engage your students?”
Professor Reder and the center, founded in 1998, are part of a trend in higher education: an emphasis on improving the quality of undergraduate teaching. Driven by a constellation of factors — including the emergence of new educational technologies, new research on effective classroom techniques, declining retention rates among undergraduates and concerns about high tuition — colleges and universities are taking steps to help junior and senior faculty better motivate and engage their students.
This wasn't always the case. If teaching ability wasn't dismissed altogether at the college level, performance in a classroom was often seen as less important than scholarship or securing grants. When Abigail Van Slyck was a tenure-track professor in architectural history at a major research university in the Southwest, she recalled: “Our provost said to me, ‘By the way, teaching is important.' So I said, ‘You mean you're not expecting as much research from me?' Oh, no. The assumption was that being a good teacher doesn't take much effort.”
When Professor Van Slyck arrived at Connecticut College, Dr. Reder invited her to attend some of his teaching workshops. “I didn't want to do it,” said Professor Van Slyck, now the dean of faculty. “But I wanted to fit in, so I did. And it changed my life.”
What she learned, she said, was a broader understanding of what it meant to be a good teacher. “I thought I was an excellent lecturer.”
Ah, the lecture. Certainly, many dazzling orators still exist. But anyone who has attended college has probably also experienced the dry-as-dust lecturer, the professor reading aloud from the textbook, the instructor who stands, back to the class, writing definitions or equations on the board. Today's college classroom is, or should be, a much different place, according to Dr. Reder and his counterparts at the 566 institutions represented in the Professional and Organizational Development Network in Higher Education, whose mission is to help improve teaching in colleges.
“The traditional style of classroom is one where it's a full-on lecture for the entire time, and there's some level of information transmission that happens there, depending on whether students are awake,” said Kevin Barry, president of the group and director of the Kaneb Center for Teaching and Learning at the University of Notre Dame. “But the processing of that information happens outside of class. What the research shows now is that if we can move that processing into the classroom, for at least part of the class time, we'll get better results in terms of learning. ‘Flipping the classroom' is the term.”
That doesn't necessarily mean that 2,000 years of the Socratic learning tradition are flipped. “One of the things that emerges from the research is that there's not one way to be an effective teacher,” said Cassandra Volpe Horii, the director of the California Institute of Technology's Center for Teaching, Learning & Outreach. “Lecture's not necessarily bad. It depends on how it's implemented.”
Rather than simply talking to students for an hour straight, she said, it is more effective to intersperse questions and allow pauses for them to reflect on and process the information. Allowing time to work in small groups to analyze or experiment with the material and using the classroom time not just to introduce concepts but to apply or think critically about them are some approaches in favor today.
The idea of being told how to teach more effectively doesn't sit well with all faculty members, said Cathleen Cuppett, professor of Spanish at Coker College in Hartsville, S.C., and the chairwoman of her college's Committee for Excellence in Teaching and Learning. “There are faculty members who feel that all this pedagogy and education stuff is claptrap and balderdash,” she said. “There are also those who believe that good teachers are born, not made. That may be true, but I do think everybody can improve.”
At Coker, which has an enrollment of 1,165 students, Professor Cuppett's five-person committee offers programs similar to those in the teaching centers at larger schools, such as periodic lunches where faculty members discuss what is working and what isn't in their classrooms. She and her committee suggest books on education theory and teaching (this year's list includes “Adult Learners in the Academy,” by Lee Bash, about effective methods for teaching the growing number of older students).
But Professor Cuppett also wonders whether teaching remains a secondary consideration when it comes to the prospects for advancement. “Whether or not teaching is used in promotion and tenure decisions, particularly at Level 1 research institutions, is an entirely different question,” she said.
At many elite universities, research and scholarship still come first for faculty, and many courses are taught in lecture halls, often by graduate students with little or no teacher training.
While acknowledging some truth to that generality, things are changing, said Emily Miller, director of the Association of American Universities' Undergraduate STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) Education Initiative. “I've seen a very genuine effort in recent years, not just in rhetoric, but in work happening at the department level, in substantial ways, to improve education quality,” she said. Her organization represents 62 of the largest research institutions in the United States and Canada.
Some big universities have long recognized the challenge of teaching vast cohorts of students in introductory classes: For example, the University of Michigan's Center for Research on Learning and Teaching began in 1962 and now employs 15 people. Most large universities have similar centers — and critically, Dr. Miller said — some are considering revising hiring, tenure and promotion criteria to place a greater emphasis on teaching.
“You can see movement happening,” Dr. Miller said. “I've seen it in the hiring. The conversations with departments are looking different, the expectations of commitment to both research and teaching are starting to be emphasized from the start.”
At many private liberal arts schools like Connecticut College, faculty members are expected to be good teachers. So it's no surprise that Dr. Reder's teaching luncheons are well attended.
Ruth Grahn, an associate professor of psychology who has been at Connecticut College since 1999, said she enjoyed the center's lunchtime sessions and the annual three-day “Camp Teach and Learn” event held on campus in late May. “I don't think you're doing your job as a college professor these days if you're not involved in these kinds of activities,” she said.

