Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.
My supervisor recently informed me that his request to buy some equipment through the company for his personal use had been denied because it was for nonstandard items — so he had placed the order in my name instead. He asked me to deliver it to him when it arrived. This isn't the first time I feel I've been put in an awkward position with him. Previously he was upset when I spoke to human resources about how I should report my time (I'm an hourly employee) for his constant after-hours calls and texts seeking work support. I have begun recording our meetings without his knowledge, so it's not just my word against his if there's a problem later.
How do I deal with this? I'm at my first corporate job, and there's been lots of restructuring lately; he's my third supervisor this year. I'm actually hoping to be restructured into another department. ANONYMOUS
What your supervisor is up to sounds so questionable that you need to think about it in terms of the potential impact on you. Ponder, for a moment, the worst case. If somebody figures out that he is in fact blatantly abusing the company's interests to further his own, and you pretty much realized (or strongly suspected) as much, how will you respond when asked why you didn't say anything?
At a minimum, you could certainly tell your supervisor that you're not comfortable with his actions, or with him doing anything in your name without your active consent. Of course, he may get upset, or even try to cause you problems as a result. Which is why it probably makes sense to go to someone else, whether that's human resources or another manager you trust.
You do not have to accuse your supervisor of anything dastardly, per se: Just stick to the facts and make it clear that it's a situation you feel is inappropriate for you to be involved in — for your own sake, and for the company's. If you're concerned about repercussions (which would be logical), say so: You could note that you'd be happier in another department, but at the very least make sure that the person you talk to knows you need an open line of communication afterward if there is trouble. (As this column has noted in the past, conversations with human resources should never be considered confidential. You can request that the discussion remain private, but always prepare for the possibility that it will not.)
Finally, for the record, laws about recording others without their consent vary by state, so the secret-taping strategy may not be the wisest plan here. It's better to get your concerns on the record with others who are in a position to do something about the problem — and whose trust in you will matter if there's a dispute.
I am a health care practitioner in a privately owned practice. The owner's daughter has worked in the practice (also as a licensed professional) for nearly two years. She frequently arrives at the office with no makeup on — and then applies it at the office. She does so after sitting through an hourlong morning meeting, but I don't object to the lack of makeup in the meeting. It's putting on makeup during office time that seems inappropriate.
It is not a discreet maneuver, and it seems unprofessional, implying to the support staff that she is not ready to start work when she arrives. Surely management would not tolerate that from hourly employees. I have considered mentioning this to her, but on the other hand she is an adult, and is otherwise completely professional. Maybe I should keep my opinion to myself? ANONYMOUS
This quandary neatly articulates a widespread workplace problem: Where, exactly, is the line between behavior that has a genuine negative impact and the kind that simply drives us up the wall?
To arrive at an answer requires an attempt at dispassionate evaluation. Remember, for starters, that this person isn't trying to annoy you, and she may have no idea that there's a problem. So clarify the dimensions of the issue here. Does the support staff actually resent this makeup ritual, seeing it as evidence of a double standard? Does that, or anything else about this colleague's habit, have some negative impact on the workplace? (Besides driving you up the wall, I mean.) Does it run contrary to whatever code of employee conduct may exist?
Perhaps there are instances when a makeup pause slowed down the pace of business or otherwise got in the way. The point is, if you can point to symptoms of an actual problem, then it should be possible to have a conversation that's focused on ramifications, and not just a critique of personal behavior.
But what if you can't find concrete evidence that this is a general problem, as opposed to a specific irritation? You may conclude that it's easiest to vary your own routine so that you no longer witness this behavior. Or it might be tempting to ask a lot of questions about her makeup choices while she's in the middle of her routine, in hopes that she'll decide the privacy of home is a better venue — although the Workologist is not a fan of passive-aggressive maneuvering.
You could also try a direct, yet diplomatic, conversation that positions the issue as something that bothers you, not something she's doing wrong. Think about how it would feel if something you do every day without a second thought is really bugging one of your colleagues: How would you want that brought to your attention?

