WASHINGTON — The lusty applause that greeted his return to the Capitol is behind him now, as are the pecks on the cheek he received as he sat at his desk on the Senate floor, looking vaguely glum, receiving good wishes like a warrior returned to civilization, injured but intact.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont is back to giving floor speeches deriding the rich and defending those in misery, writing Op-Ed pieces against trade and giving television interviews during which he declines to fully support Hillary Clinton for president. He spent much of Wednesday vigorously denouncing a rescue bill for Puerto Rico that had the support of two-thirds of his fellow senators.
“Let us be clear,” Mr. Sanders said on the Senate floor Wednesday, reviving his familiar Brooklyn-inflected pedagogy. “This issue is a significant part of what the entire debate regarding Puerto Rico is about: Billionaire hedge fund managers who purchase Puerto Rican bonds for pennies on the dollar now want a 100 percent return on their investment, while schools are being shut down in Puerto Rico, while pensions are being threatened with cuts, while children on the island go hungry. That is morally unacceptable.”
Mr. Sanders, who has not withdrawn from the presidential race, has not really left the Democratic primary battlefield. Apparently defeated but decidedly unbowed, he has brought his campaign to Capitol Hill, most visibly in the large security detail that surrounds him as he moves about (“He is very secure,” noted Senator Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina) but also in his comportment with his colleagues.
Eager to expand the left-leaning coalition he has built during his campaign, Mr. Sanders has been pushing his colleagues to take on policy fights that helped propel his base's passion and gave him new gravitas among Democrats.
In addition to opposing the measure to aid Puerto Rico, he is working hard to kill trade agreements. He is threatening a bill that would govern the labeling of genetically modified food.
“Everyone knows the fervency of his opinions on different things,” said Senator Harry Reid, the minority leader, who, like most senators, was eager to get on with business and out of town for the Fourth of July.
The Democrats with whom the independent Mr. Sanders caucuses have been tolerant of his not-quite-campaign, in no small part because they do not wish to emulate Republicans, whose wounds have been oozing openly. But many Democratic colleagues, especially the women, are growing weary of his progressive lectures that seem more fit for a dais than a lunchroom encounter, and his unwillingness to energetically back Mrs. Clinton.
“He feels he has a duty to his followers to raise the flag on the issues they care about,” said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri. “We are all being patient, and we're all hopeful he'll be on the campaign” for Mrs. Clinton.
For now, Mr. Sanders seems to be adjusting — if slightly mournfully — at the fork in the road between kind-of former candidate and definitely current senator. He walks through the halls at times emulating Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, whose shoulder he gave a squeeze as he bounded through the basement of the Capitol on Wednesday, brushing off reporters with a wave. At other times he becomes chatty again, talking about legislation he despises. “I'm sure it's really hard on him,” said Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California. “Losing is awful.”
He has his eyes on the senior Democratic slot on the Senate's high-profile Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions — as of late very bipartisan — to the dismay of Republicans, who prefer Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the senior Democrat on the committee, and even some Democrats, who fret that Mr. Sanders might try to push the committee to the left on several issues.
“If the opportunity were to arise,” said Michael Briggs, a spokesman for Mr. Sanders, “he would be proud to chair that committee, which deals with so many issues of vital importance to the American people.” The decision is Ms. Murray's to make.
Others said they can already see Mr. Sanders's influence on Democrats. “He has made a big splash,” Mr. Scott said. “So his influence can be seen on Hillary Clinton's campaign, and over the last few months up here, especially on the banking committee, he has moved people to the left.”
Mr. Sanders clearly wants to work with Democrats to put together legislation that reflects his priorities — like affordable college — while still working to get much of his agenda in the platform of the party to which he does not belong for its convention next month.
“As he has said many times, however, he does not believe real change is going to take place until a political revolution occurs and millions of people stand up and fight for their rights,” Mr. Briggs said.
For now, Mr. Sanders's campaign has given him newfound clout among Democrats. But he risks losing some if he does not endorse Mrs. Clinton soon, and he is still working to figure out how to spend his capital in a caucus where he lacks many close friends.
“Bernie is going to do what Bernie's going to do,” said Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, “and the only thing I think is that it should be something constructive and helpful to the ticket.”
Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, recognizes that Mr. Sanders's appeal is valuable to the party and will try to harness it, while attempting to convince him that uniting around Mrs. Clinton is the best way to defeat Donald J. Trump in November. “In our caucus,” Mr. Schumer said, “the general view is that Bernie is a constructive force.”

