The small Texas city of Katy was left shaken after a woman fatally shot her two grown daughters and was then killed by a police officer, according to the authorities.
Under different circumstances, in a different era, the story of a shooting and a police confrontation on a street in a small city of 14,000 people might not have drawn much attention, but this one became widely publicized over the weekend thanks in part to the power of social media, where gun violence remains a subject of fierce debate.
Law enforcement said that a deputy from the Fort Bend County Sheriff’s Office and an officer from nearby Fulshear responded to reports of gunfire at the family’s home in the suburb of Houston on Friday and found the two young women — Taylor Sheats, 22, and Madison Sheats, 17 — lying in the street after having been shot.
Their mother, Christy Sheats, 42, was standing nearby with a gun in her hand, the authorities said.
When the mother refused to drop the weapon, the officer shot her once in the chest, Sheriff Troy E. Nehls said.
On Monday, the sheriff’s office released more details about the shootings, though a motive was not immediately clear. It said Christy Sheats had called a family meeting, and when her husband, Jason Sheats, 45, and their daughters gathered in the living room, the mother opened fire.
The daughters and the father ran out the front door in the 6000 block of Remson Hollow Lane, and Madison Sheats collapsed, the authorities said. Mr. Sheats ran to the end of a cul-de-sac, Taylor Sheats ran into the street, and the mother followed, shooting her.
Christy Sheats went back inside to reload her weapon, returned and shot the older daughter again, according to a witness. Taylor Sheats was taken to a hospital, where she died.
The police found a .38-caliber handgun at the scene, the statement said.
Sheriff Nehls said that crisis intervention teams had been sent to the home more than once in recent years over turmoil that seemed to revolve around the mother.
The statement on Monday said the police had responded to 14 calls to the house since 2012, including for alarms. But the statement added that “legal constraints” prevented the release of any further information, including 911 calls.
The bloodshed on a quiet middle-class street in the city, which is about 30 miles west of Houston, left neighbors and the victims’ loved ones shattered.
Sheriff Nehls said Sunday that Mr. Sheats was “ having a very difficult time with this.”
“They seemed to be an all-American family,” the sheriff said. “Then you realize that what happens behind closed doors — you just don’t know.”
Catherine Knowles, a friend of Christy Sheats’s, told a local broadcaster, KTRK-TV, that she had seen no indication of any trouble that could have made Ms. Sheats snap. Ms. Sheats spoke proudly of her daughters, Ms. Knowles said.
“This is not the Christy that I know — it’s just not,” Ms. Knowles said. “I thought it was the wrong person. It had to be.”
Taylor Sheats’s Facebook profile says she had studied at Lone Star College at CyFair in Cypress, Tex., and indicated hopes of becoming an artist.
Madison Sheats was to begin her senior year at Seven Lakes High School in Katy this fall.

