CHICAGO — Regardless of what happens when Chile plays Colombia on Wednesday night, one thing is plain: The world now knows that Chile's soccer team is for real. Fresh off a 7-0 thrashing of Mexico, arguably the best team in the North American region, Chile has used this month's Copa América Centenario to erase any doubts over its emergence as a power player from South America.
While few doubted the quality of Chile's current roster, flecked as it is with talent from Barcelona, Arsenal and Bayern Munich, there still was a sense that Chile's best moments had always occurred on home soil, or close to it. Chile advanced to the knockout stage of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, and it entered this summer's Copa América as the defending champion, a title won when it hosted last year's tournament. The country's best moment at a World Cup came in 1962, also a tournament played at home.
But on Wednesday night, Chile enters its Copa América semifinal against Colombia knowing a victory would set up a blockbuster final rematch: Chile beat Argentina on penalty kicks last year in Santiago, 4-1, after a scoreless draw. To get back to the championship game, it will have to win without the suspended Arturo Vidal (accumulated yellow cards), but there is a growing sense here that the team no longer needs the comforts of home to get a big result.
“Everyone knows Vidal is a great player,” Chile midfielder Charles Aránguiz said Monday. “But we have a good lineup and a lot of players who are prepared to take the opportunity. I think you saw the team we are against Mexico.”
This was not bluster. Chile, for once, is deep enough to overcome the absence of a star like Vidal against a Colombian team that can attack at will. Moreover, Chile's current status as one of the world's top five teams — behind Colombia (No. 3) and top-ranked Argentina — reflects a sea change in the fortunes of what used to be considered the lesser sides of South America. It also illustrates how the voracious appetite of the European leagues for players has transformed nations like Chile, Colombia and even Ecuador and Venezuela, which reached the Copa América quarterfinals, into emerging powers.
It is easy to forget that Chile was once a side in the wilderness. Best known until last summer for a third-place finish at a World Cup it hosted in 1962, Chile's international fortunes had long been constrained by a weak domestic league and an inability to develop marquee talent.
Other issues were self-inflicted: Las Rojas had been badly damaged by a 1989 incident in which goalkeeper Roberto Rojas faked an injury in a key qualifying game. FIFA awarded the game to Brazil, eliminating Chile from the 1990 World Cup, and then barred the country from the 1994 tournament as well.
Chile returned to the World Cup in 1998, but today that team looks like an aberration. Heavily based around domestic players plucked from Club Universidad de Chile, Chile qualified on the strength of the partnership of strikers Iván Zamorano and Marcelo Salas. But only Zamorano had European experience at that time, and Salas, while a star in Argentina with River Plate, had to wait until after the Cup for his move to Italy's Serie A.
Fast forward 10 years, and things have changed. With television money starting to flow into European leagues, clubs began scouting beyond the traditional South American markets of Argentina and Brazil. Chile was one of the nations that recognized how important it was to place its best talent overseas. By 2010, Chilean stars were getting their foot in the door in Turkey, Greece and Germany, starting what has become an exodus of talent. The result was a stronger national team.
The current Chile squad has 13 European players, and the teams they play for are among the world's best: Alexis Sánchez at Arsenal, goalkeeper Claudio Bravo at Barcelona and Vidal at Bayern Munich. Even their journeymen have a pedigree: Gary Medel, once a curiosity at Cardiff City in the Premier League, is a steady player at Inter Milan. And Eduardo Vargas, who had a lackluster season at Hoffenheim in the Bundesliga, suddenly became the Copa's leading scorer this week after slotting four goals past Mexico.
Because Vidal and Marcelo Díaz (injured) were likely to be absent Wednesday night, Chile arrived in the semifinals knowing it would need strong contributions off the bench against a Colombia squad led by Real Madrid's James Rodríguez.
“We're going to try to play the same way we did against Mexico, and the way we have through qualifying and this tournament,” Aránguiz said. “We will be confident, we will be agile, and we will press. And then we will see.”

