The Cincinnati Reds formally retired Pete Rose’s No. 14 on Sunday, capping three days of celebrations that filled Great American Ball Park and transported a struggling franchise back to its glory days, if only briefly.
The Reds added Rose’s number to those displayed behind home plate — the 10th number to be retired by baseball’s first professional team — before beating San Diego, 3-0. Major League Baseball had to approve the ceremony because of Rose’s lifetime ban for betting on his team.
“It solidifies what I’ve been saying for many, many, many years and will continue to say it: Cincinnati is the baseball capital of the world,” Rose, the major leagues’ career hits leader, told the crowd.
The only other Reds player to wear the number since Rose’s 1989 banishment was his son Pete Jr., who was called up in 1997 to spark interest during an 86-loss season.
Strasburg Goes on Injured List Washington Nationals pitcher Stephen Strasburg was placed on the 15-day disabled list with an upper back strain after being scratched from his start against the Brewers in Milwaukee.
Tanner Roark started instead as the Nationals won, 3-2.
Strasburg is 10-0 with a 2.90 E.R.A. this season.
Around the Majors Chris Sale struck out seven and became the majors’ first 13-game winner as the Chicago White Sox beat visiting Toronto, 5-2. Chris Davis hit his seventh career grand slam as host Baltimore sent Tampa Bay to its 11th straight loss, 12-5. The Indians hit four home runs off Justin Verlander in one inning as Cleveland beat host Detroit, 9-3, and extended its winning streak to nine. Jose Fernandez struck out 13 and host Miami beat the Chicago Cubs, 6-1. Ian Kennedy struck out 11 as Kansas City ended visiting Houston’s seven-game win streak, 6-1. St. Louis hit six homers, including two each by Matt Carpenter and Tommy Pham, to win at Seattle, 11-6.
The family of Pat Summitt, the Hall of Fame coach who led Tennessee’s women’s basketball team to eight national titles, asked for prayers as she struggles with early-onset dementia.
A family statement, posted on the Pat Summitt Foundation’s website, said that the last few days had been difficult for Summitt and that she was surrounded by loved ones.
Summitt stepped down as coach at Tennessee in 2012. Her 1,098 career victories are the most for any Division I men’s or women’s basketball coach.
Mercury 104, Liberty 97 Candace Dupree scored 26 points, including 8 in overtime, as visiting Phoenix beat the Liberty, 104-97, to end the Liberty’s six-game winning streak.
Tina Charles had 26 points for the Liberty.
Simone Biles became the first American in more than four decades to win a fourth consecutive national gymnastics championship by cruising to an easy victory in St. Louis.
Biles finished with a two-day total of 125.00 points, four ahead of the three-time Olympic medalist Aly Raisman.
The five-woman team for the Rio Olympics will be selected in two weeks.
The 607th-ranked Billy Hurley III captured his first PGA Tour title with a two-under-par 69 at the Quicken Loans National in Bethesda, Md. Hurley, a United States Naval Academy graduate who lives in nearby Annapolis, finished three stokes ahead of Vijay Singh.
Tony Stewart held off Denny Hamlin on the final lap to end an 84-race losing streak with a Nascar Sprint Cup Series road course victory in Sonoma, Calif.

