After years of feuding, the Yankees and StubHub announced an agreement on Monday under which the company will become the team’s official ticket reseller but with caveats that include a floor on how much tickets can be discounted.
StubHub will replace the Yankees Ticket Exchange, which was offered through Ticketmaster and remained the primary source for Yankees tickets. The new system will begin operation on July 7, for tickets for the July 15 game.
Fans who do not sell tickets by July 7 on the Yankees Ticket Exchange will have to re-list them on StubHub, which will have a floor for pricing: a 50 percent discount on the price of an individual ticket at the full season-ticket rate.
The agreement, which was unveiled at a late-morning news conference at Yankee Stadium, comes as the Yankees have been struggling on the field, and attendance has dropped by more than 65,000 fans over all from this point a year ago. But whether this new agreement helps the Yankees sell more tickets for the rest of the season remains to be seen.
The agreement also comes just four months after the Yankees introduced mobile ticketing as a primary method for entry to Yankee Stadium and eliminated the use of print-at-home tickets.
The Yankees cited ticket fraud as one reason for the print-at-home ban. But many perceived the new policy as a way to exclude StubHub from a good chunk of the Yankees’ ticket market because StubHub did not have the means to distribute Yankees tickets through mobile devices.
Instead, Yankees fans still using StubHub this season had to obtain hard-stock tickets through the company in order to gain entrance to Yankee Stadium. In some instances, that meant walking a dozen blocks from the stadium to a StubHub outlet on the day of the game and then, tickets in hand, walking back to the stadium.
Fans complained about that inconvenience, as well as the fact that there were occasions when the mobile tickets could not be scanned, requiring people to seek help at the Yankee Stadium customer service windows as game time approached. Some fans lamented that they simply could no longer do what they had done for years — print out tickets at home.
The new agreement will not bring back that option. At the news conference, the team president, Randy Levine, said that print-at-home tickets were almost “obsolete” and that mobile ticketing was “overwhelmingly” what the team’s fans wanted.
In any case, both the Yankees and StubHub proclaimed the agreement a landmark deal. Levine said it would provide a “superior, more secure, better experience” for fans.
Scott Cutler, the president of StubHub, mentioned that his company had been built through the promotion of an open marketplace, where the public sets the price. That, he acknowledged, will not exactly be the case with the Yankees because there will be a limit on how much tickets can be discounted.
In effect, he said, StubHub was now taking into account how much the Yankees valued their brand and how strongly they believed it was threatened by huge markdowns in ticket prices.
In the past, that issue has been a source of friction between StubHub and the Yankees, and it led the team to pull out of a national deal that Major League Baseball has with the company to resell tickets.
But now there is money to be made together by the Yankees and StubHub. The two sides will split the profits from the resale of tickets on StubHub’s site, guaranteeing the Yankees at least $50 million in revenue over the life of the six-year agreement, according to StubHub.
And if the Yankees play well and attendance and demand for tickets increase, StubHub could pay the team more.
Levine dismissed the idea that the deal came about in part because of pressure the Yankees might be feeling as their attendance declines in a period in which some iconic players on the team have retired, October baseball is no longer a guarantee, and their local rivals, the Mets, have transformed themselves into a formidable club.
Through Sunday, the Yankees were averaging 38,313 fans a game this season. The Mets were at 35,254, a significant closing of a gap that has generally existed between the attendance figures of the two teams in recent decades.

