Early this year, Mike Quinn, a lawyer in the art world, moved from the West Village to the East Village, into an apartment in an eight-unit building on Third Street between First and Second Avenues. The twin plagues of chain commerce and luxury residential towers have eradicated much of what distinguished the two neighborhoods historically, but Mr. Quinn noticed one big difference right away — all over the East Village, and where he lived in particular, people were hauling luggage around all the time. He began referring to his block as Suitcase Alley. Airbnb guests from around the world remain always in view.
On June 17, the State Legislature passed what would become one of the most stringent home-sharing laws in the country, if not the world, should Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo approve it. The measure would forbid not only landlords, but also tenants, to list apartments for short-term rental on Airbnb and similar sites, and would impose fines of up to $7,500 on those who flout it. It is already illegal in New York to rent out an unoccupied apartment in a building with three or more units for fewer than 30 days, but Airbnb is full of advertisements for such places regardless; about 55 percent of Airbnb listings violate the law, according to housing activists.
The company doesn’t dispute the figure; it instead seeks to have the legislation modified, so that a costume designer living in Chelsea, for instance, could sublet her rental apartment for the four or five days a month she worked in Los Angeles with no worries that she was engaging in an illegitimate transaction.
Although Airbnb has faced fierce opposition in San Francisco, Berlin and Barcelona, the new law in New York arrives at a moment when certain governments and municipalities have begun to regard it far more affectionately. Earlier this month, the European Union issued a series of guidelines to encourage the growth of the so-called sharing economy, which it sees as a kind of salvation in a limp job market, and cautioned its member states against heavy regulation.
On Wednesday, Chicago’s City Council overwhelmingly passed a relatively lenient bill governing how sites like Airbnb could operate in the city. This came after intensive lobbying on the part of the company, whose policy director, Chris Lehane, like the city’s mayor, Rahm Emanuel, is an alumnus of the Clinton White House. The legislation, which has certainly had very vocal opponents, establishes a 4 percent tax on each rental to help fund services for the homeless.
As one city alderman described the new era to The Chicago Tribune: “This is ‘The Jetsons.’ We’re not going back to ‘The Flintstones.’”
In New York and other cities with exorbitant housing costs, one longstanding objection to Airbnb has been that certain listings effectively remove units from the residential housing market, suppressing supply and theoretically driving up rents.
According to a report to be released by a consortium of housing activists, 16 percent of Airbnb listings in New York City, or approximately 8,000 units, should be considered “impact listings,” meaning that they are booked several times per month and listed for at least three months per year by someone who advertises multiple apartments on Airbnb, and not just the single apartment in which he or she lives. These are the commercial profiteers.
Validating Mr. Quinn’s Suitcase Alley observation, the report found that impact listings predominated in the East Village. The report goes further to state that the number of vacant and available apartments in New York City would increase by 10 percent if those listings were returned to the rental market.
One potential if unlikely road to legislative compromise would be for Airbnb itself to ban those listings, effectively returning livable apartments to the housing market. This might encourage state and local government to loosen the restrictions over what the costume designer and the retired school principal might do with the apartments they rent on occasional out-of-town weekends. With the city’s population aging rapidly, home sharing is an obvious means to extending income beyond age 70 or 80.
Governing Airbnb has consumed a great deal more of the political conversation than have other measures that might be taken to alleviate the city’s housing problems. To the best of my knowledge, no one is clamoring to ban the conversion of multiple-unit brownstones into single-family homes, for instance. These conversions dominate the landscape in parts of Brooklyn. On one block in Brooklyn Heights, a developer is turning a building formerly containing seven rental units into a 7,750-square-foot single-family townhouse that will go on the market for $18 million. Many people find this distasteful, but few are taking to the barricades to suggest it should be against the law.
The other civic criticism of Airbnb, which arguably has its biggest enemy of all in the city’s hotel lobby, is that the transience it generates makes neighborhoods less stable. This could very well be true, but so far, this is something legislators admit has yet to be quantified. I asked Mr. Quinn how he experiences the East Village in the age of Airbnb, an enterprise in which he sees both social value and diminishment. He regularly finds himself helping tourists with their luggage as they make their way up and down East Third Street. He is occasionally inconvenienced, he told me, but is not fundamentally disturbed.
“If you have a bad neighbor they are there for a year or forever; if you have a bad Airbnb neighbor they are there for two days,” he said. “Has it corrupted the neighborhood? I think the high rents already there corrupted the neighborhood.”

