BUFFALO — Brian Burke’s hockey memory is longer than his distinctive white hair, which he wore swept behind his ears at the N.H.L. draft this weekend.
During a 40-year career as a hockey professional — which has included stints as a minor league defenseman and as an executive with the N.H.L. and five of its franchises — Burke, 60, has closely observed the evolution of the sport in the United States.
Burke, the Calgary Flames’ president for hockey operations, reflected on a record 12 players from the United States selected in the first round on Friday night while he stood in First Niagara Center amid tables filled with scouts and coaches.
Of those 12 players, five had played youth hockey in the St. Louis area. “There was a time when nobody from St. Louis got drafted, let alone in the first round,” Burke said.
Matthew Tkachuk, a 6-foot-1, 200-pound forward and the son of Keith Tkachuk, a former member of the Blues, was the first taken, at No. 6, by the Flames.
Four of Matthew Tkachuk’s former youth hockey teammates followed: Clayton Keller was picked seventh by Arizona; Logan Brown, 11th by Ottawa; Luke Kunin, 15th by Minnesota; and Trent Frederic, 29th by Boston.
Frederic credited the youth team’s coaches — Keith Tkachuk and two other former Blues, Al MacInnis, a Hall of Fame defenseman, and Jeff Brown — for the success he and his former teammates have enjoyed. “When you have coaches like that,” Frederic said, “something like this is bound to happen.’’
Dan Bylsma, the coach of the Buffalo Sabres, said he encountered some of the St. Louis players while coaching his son’s team two years ago. But the development of young players, he said, was going on throughout the United States. He noted that Auston Matthews, the first pick over all, was from Phoenix.
All five of the first-round picks from St. Louis wound up moving to Michigan as teenagers to further their development with U.S.A. Hockey’s national team development program. Now in its 20th year, it has served as a centralized training program for elite players under 18 and has acted as a springboard to the college and professional ranks.
Eleven of the 12 Americans selected in the first round spent at least some time in the program.
Though the number of Americans taken in the first round made history, Canada still had the most players taken in all seven rounds at 89, according to the N.H.L. The United States was second with 52.
Burke said some of U.S.A. Hockey’s recent tactics, such as credentialing youth coaches and offering them continuing training, had been borrowed from Canada.
“Canada has been the most powerful country in hockey for years,” he said. “They still are. Much of what we’ve done mimics what Canada has done in terms of development. Imitation is the best form of praise.”
However, Burke believes that the United States can further close the gap with Canada.
“There’s more people in California than there are in Canada,” he said. “So the U.S. should be producing more players.”

