UTICA, N.Y. — The first trial began on Thursday in what New York authorities say was a 14-hour group attack during a church counseling session that left a young man dead and his brother injured.
In his opening statement, the Oneida County district attorney, Scott McNamara, detailed the role of the victims’ half sister, Sarah Ferguson, 33, in the assault last October that killed Lucas Leonard, 19, and put his 17-year-old brother in the hospital. Ms. Ferguson, Mr. McNamara said, used the plug end of a power cord to repeatedly strike her brothers in the groin.
Ms. Ferguson faces murder and manslaughter charges. She was one of nine relatives and church members charged after the beating inside the Word of Life Christian Church, a family-run congregation operating out of a former school that also served as a communal home for several members.
Mr. McNamara said the teenagers had been ordered during the beating to repent for sins that included using a voodoo doll and molesting children. Police officials said that there was no evidence to support the sex-abuse claim and that the counseling session had been called after the brothers discussed leaving the secretive church.
“This was a modern-day witch trial,” Mr. McNamara told the judge presiding over the trial. Ms. Ferguson had waived her right to a jury trial this week.
Her lawyer, Rebecca Wittman, declined to deliver an opening statement Thursday. She said Ms. Ferguson would testify at the trial.
Lucas Leonard died slowly after collapsing and losing consciousness as blood from a cut to his penis saturated his left pant leg and sneaker, Mr. McNamara said. By the time church members took him to a hospital, his heart had stopped, he said.
The younger brother, Christopher Leonard, was hospitalized for a week with life-threatening damage to his kidneys and injuries to a lung, the prosecutor said.
Mr. McNamara said Ms. Ferguson, who had blood on her clothing, ignored the severity of her brothers’ injuries and failed to get medical help that could have saved Lucas Leonard.
The victims’ father, Bruce Leonard, pleaded guilty on Wednesday to assault for his role in the beating and agreed to testify against Ms. Ferguson and the remaining defendants. Their mother, Deborah Leonard, pleaded guilty to assault in December with the same conditions.
The other defendants were expected to be tried in the fall on varying counts of second-degree murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, assault and gang assault. They include the pastor, Tiffanie Irwin, who Deborah Leonard said was viewed as a prophet; Ms. Irwin’s mother, Traci Irwin; and the pastor’s brothers Joseph and Daniel Irwin. Two other church members, Linda Morey and her son David Morey, also are charged. All have pleaded not guilty.

