PHOENIX — Firefighters across Arizona and New Mexico battled 31 wildfires on Wednesday, their efforts complicated by a relentless heat wave and bone-dry conditions. And in the Angeles National Forest, on the northern edge of Los Angeles, two fires kept more than 300 families from their homes as the fires threatened to merge into one.
Other fires ignited in Colorado and Utah, threatening homes, closing roads and stoking the zero-sum competition for finite resources — firefighters and the airplanes and helicopters that dump chemicals and water.
Decisions about which areas will receive firefighting resources are revisited each morning, as team leaders assess how much ground the fires have gained, who or what is endangered, and how firefighters will transport tools, water and fuel for their chain saws.
It is like piecing together an ever-changing puzzle, “deciding where resources go, stay and will move in the next few hours,” said Jessica Gardetto, a spokeswoman for the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, the mother ship of wildfire management in the country.
Complicating the equation is the record heat — oppressive where fires are not burning and particularly dangerous where they are. At least five people have died since Friday while hiking in Arizona, overcome by temperatures topping 110 that have been gripping much of the state.
The crews fighting fires in remote forest here must travel much of the way on foot, lugging tools, water and backpacks weighing at least 40 pounds, full of gear and other necessities: foot powder, sunscreen, antacids. Once they arrive, they typically work for 16 hours straight. The toughest jobs — felling trees and yanking brush and roots from the ground, removing all the vegetation that keeps a fire going — are done at night.
“That's when the air is cooler and when the flames calm down,” said Don Muise, safety officer at the Cedar Creek fire, burning on the Fort Apache Reservation in east-central Arizona, just outside the city of Show Low.
The Cedar Creek fire is burning at 6,300 feet, and temperatures were in the mid-90s on Wednesday — some five degrees above average, though nowhere near the 110 registered in Phoenix that day. Still, Mr. Muise repeated a handy recipe to the 967 firefighters assigned to the blaze, as if it were a mantra: “Two measures of water for one measure of Gatorade.”
“Drink early and drink often,” he said.
Wildfires are judged not by size, but by complexity, and none were more complex in Arizona on Wednesday than the Cedar Creek fire, which had burned roughly 43,000 acres, an area about the size of Baton Rouge, La.
Another fire, named Juniper, in the Tonto National Forest, had consumed less than that — 31,000 square miles — but because the area it was burning was so remote, it had a smaller corps of firefighters assigned to it, according to official reports.
“The fires that are threatening lives and communities become top priority, regardless of how big they are,” Ms. Gardetto said.
At 4,900 acres, the San Gabriel Complex, as the merging Southern California fires have come to be known, was licking at backyards in the cities of Azusa and Duarte. Some 1,400 firefighters fought the flames Wednesday, taking advantage of the slightly cooler temperature to make headway.
The wind picked up in the afternoon, animating the flames but pushing them away from the cities that stood under threat, said Andrew Mitchell, a spokesman for the Angeles National Forest.
The decision whether to allow the remaining evacuees back home will depend on how much firefighters can gain overnight, Mr. Mitchell said.
Heavy tankers — large airplanes that can drop 2,000 to 12,000 gallons of a chemical mix known as fire retardant to slow the flames — are at the ready. Seventeen of the fleet's 23 aircraft were stationed in California and Arizona on Wednesday, “where we're having most fire activity,” Ms. Gardetto said.
In Show Low and its neighbor to the south, Pinetop-Lakeside, both in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, residents remained on notice, waiting to hear if they would have to leave. Gov. Doug Ducey of Arizona issued a disaster declaration, freeing up National Guard troops and $200,000 in state funding to help pay for fighting the fire.
“Ensuring the safety of these communities and all of the women and men working around the clock to fight this fire remains our top priority,” Mr. Ducey said.
When it comes to fighting wildfires, the country is divided in 10 geographic areas, and each has its own crews and incident command teams. Arizona and New Mexico form the Southwest region, based in Albuquerque. California, where fires have great destructive potential because they often burn close to homes, has two regions — one covering the northern part of the state, and the other the south.
The regions are prioritized on a scale of 1 to 5, according to the number of fires they have and the threats these fires present to lives and communities. Five is the highest priority; the Southwest region was at priority level 4 on Wednesday, the highest in the country.

