Beyond the favorites, here are six players who have the skills to succeed at Wimbledon, which begins Monday.
With her victory this month on the grass in Birmingham, England, Keys cracked the top 10 in the world rankings for the first time. Keys, a 21-year-old American, used her powerful serve and ground game to defeat Carla Suárez Navarro and Barbora Strycova to earn her second grass-court title. A quarterfinalist at Wimbledon last year, Keys hits flat, penetrating groundstrokes and has improved her net game and mobility in the last year. Her serve, hit with a deep, graceful knee bend that belies the astonishing power she unleashes as she leaps high to make contact, is one of the game’s best. Keys has the talent to contend for the Wimbledon title.
This tall, 24-year-old Californian has had a stellar grass-court season, upsetting top-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska in the first round at Birmingham and the previous week winning the title in Den Bosch, the Netherlands, for the second time. Vandeweghe’s formidable serve keeps opponents off balance: She uses different spins and paces to disrupt rhythm. She backs up her serve with a big ground game. Like Tomas Berdych in the men’s game, Vandeweghe generates blistering pace on her forehand with seeming effortlessness. Her ability to come forward and finish points with swinging midcourt volleys and a deft touch around the net has made her a much more dangerous and opportunistic player. Seeded 28th, Vandeweghe has the game to go deep into the second week.
Riske, an American, followed up her victory at the grass-court tournament in Eastbourne, England, this month by storming to the finals in Nottingham, where she narrowly lost to Karolina Pliskova. Although ranked 80th, Riske is a superb grass-court player who has had her best results as a pro on the grass in England. She hits the ball cleanly off both sides, taking the ball early to control court positioning, and she is capable of upsetting a seed or two with her understanding of how to play on grass. At 25, Riske is a true dark horse, but the increasing depth in the women’s game, as exemplified by Shelby Rogers’s inspired run to the quarterfinals at Roland Garros, suggests that there is more parity than ever before.
Raonic, a tall Canadian, has added John McEnroe to his team for the grass-court season, and the early results look promising. Raonic led Andy Murray, the world No. 2, for a set and a half before falling in three sets in the Queen’s Club final this month. Arguably the game’s best server, Raonic, 25, has steadily improved and enters Wimbledon as the sixth seed. McEnroe is encouraging Raonic to serve-and-volley more, to use his chip backhand for variety and to be more aggressive from the backcourt, especially on the forehand. Like Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl, who coach Novak Djokovic and Murray, McEnroe will look to instill a champion’s confidence in his pupil. Raonic has the tools to win a Grand Slam and is a legitimate contender for the Wimbledon title.
Nicknamed Sasha, the 19-year-old Zverev has vaulted up the ATP rankings this year, and enters Wimbledon as the 24th seed. He stunned Roger Federer, his boyhood hero, in three sets in the semifinals in Halle, Germany, and then lost to the resurgent Florian Mayer in the final. Zverev, a German, has a nearly perfect game technically, with a superb serve, commanding groundstrokes and a flair for great shotmaking. He moves exceptionally well for a tall man. Coached by his father — also named Alexander — Zverev has matured as a competitor in 2016, displaying an even-keeled temperament and a fearlessness that make him a can’t-miss future Grand Slam champion. Along with Dominic Thiem, 22, and Nick Kyrgios, 21, Zverev is the future of the men’s game.
An unflappable Belgian, Goffin wins matches with a rock-solid all-court game and a superb mental approach. He has ascended the ATP rankings, entering Wimbledon as the 10th seed, with a game founded on footwork, quick decision making and an uncanny ability to play every point with laserlike focus. Goffin reached the quarterfinals at Roland Garros, where he lost a prizefight of a match to Dominic Thiem. Goffin, 25, with a slight build and unflashy style, wins matches by outthinking his opponents and keeping a cool head when adversity hits. His high tennis I.Q. is a marvel to observe when he is in action. He could go deep into the second week at Wimbledon.

