WASHINGTON — Isabel Aguilar had sworn she would not cry on Thursday if the Supreme Court ruled against President Obama's programs to give deportation protection to immigrants in the country illegally. But she did.
“I am so tired and frustrated,” said Ms. Aguilar, 45, an undocumented immigrant from Honduras living in Maryland. She would have been eligible for protection under the president's initiatives because two of her children are citizens, born in the United States.
“I was hoping for some relief,” she said. “Now we have to keep on living with this fear.”
Ms. Aguilar was among dozens of immigrants who gathered at the steps of the Supreme Court for the decision as others across the country congregated in city squares, at churches and in front of televisions. The justices' 4-4 tie left in place an injunction by lower courts on Mr. Obama's programs that has been in effect since February 2015.
Once word of the decision reached supporters of the president's programs, a defeated feeling filled the plaza outside the court. As immigrants rolled up their banners and collected their poster boards, they stopped to share hugs, comforting pats on the arm or disappointed half-smiles.
More than four million immigrants would have been eligible for temporary deportation deferrals and work permits under programs Mr. Obama announced in November 2014. The largest one, Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents, aims to prevent the separation of undocumented parents from their children who are in the country legally.
Many of those parents were angry or sad, but also resigned, because the court's decision left them with the same uncertainties they had before. Others put on brave faces, saying the setback would spur them to do what they could, even without legal status, to turn out voters in the November elections who would push Congress to give them a pathway to legal status.
Ricardo Campos, 27, said he would go from the Supreme Court to his home in Silver Spring, Md., to tell his sister that she would not receive protection from deportation. His sister has an American son with a heart condition, he said. The family, from El Salvador, was uncertain how to care for the boy if his sister were forced to leave the country.
“We will take this fight to the polls and make sure someone who supports the immigrant community is elected,” said Mr. Campos, who has a deportation deferral from an earlier presidential program.
That program, known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, was created in 2012 for young undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children. It was not affected by the Supreme Court's decision. About 728,000 young immigrants have received deferrals and work permits under that program, known as DACA.
For undocumented parents, the court's decision means a return to routines aimed at avoiding any brush with immigration authorities and to lives limited by a lack of Social Security numbers and working papers.
“The worry goes on for me and for my daughter,” said Karen Fiallos, 37, a Honduran who has been in the country for 14 years and is a single mother of a 13-year-old American daughter. She watched the news from her home near Baltimore.
Ms. Fiallos, who works cleaning houses, said she had been going to immigration court regularly to fight a deportation order that might have been suspended if the president's initiatives had gone forward. Each time she has a court date, she said, her daughter loses her appetite and does not want to go to school.
“She thinks I will leave and I won't come back,” Ms. Fiallos said.
Mr. Obama sought to reassure immigrants on Thursday, saying in a news conference that revised enforcement priorities he also announced in 2014 would stay in place. Under those policies, immigrant parents who have been in the country for many years and do not have a criminal record are not priorities for deportation.
But immigrants pointed out that mothers and children who arrived in the recent border influx from Central America were on the priority list. Ms. Aguilar said a neighbor of hers, a Central American mother with a 3-year-old child, was arrested by immigration agents on Wednesday morning. Word of the deportation alarmed her neighborhood.
In Phoenix, where state immigration laws have led to intense political fights in recent years, immigrants said the court's decision made them more determined to press Congress for change.
Claudia Faudoa, 44, said she moved to Phoenix from Mexico 22 years ago. She and her husband, also an undocumented Mexican, have three boys, all American citizens. She was fired from her job at a property management company in 2014, she said, because she did not have a Social Security number. Since then, she has not found steady work.
“It has been very difficult for me, for my boys,” she said. “This is my home, our home. They deserve the best that I can give them.”
Though despairing at first, she focused on the future. “I think that what happened gives me more strength to keep fighting,” Ms. Faudoa said. “We need some type of reform.”
Many immigrant groups have been working this year with a dual strategy — helping people prepare to apply for the president's programs if they started, while holding training sessions to help legal immigrants naturalize and encouraging Latino and other immigrant citizens to register to vote.
In New York, Carmen Salvador cried along with her two sons as they saw the news of the court decision on television in their Brooklyn apartment. Ms. Salvador, 36, came to the United States from Mexico 16 years ago. Her 12-year-old American-born son, Ruben, has only one kidney, and she worries what could happen if he needs a transplant.
Without legal papers, Ms. Salvador has been able to find work only as a dog sitter. Between now and November, she intends to urge her neighbors who are citizens to vote.
“I'm going to go out with my Latino people and say, ‘Hey, vote for us,'” she said.

