EDINBURGH — “No one knows we’re here,” said John McAreavey, owner of one of Edinburgh’s oldest private residences. “Taxi drivers who have worked in the city for years tell me they never knew Drylaw House existed. People sometimes wander in when the gates are open, thinking the grounds are a public park.”
Despite being just two miles from the center of Edinburgh, one of Britain’s busiest cities, Drylaw House, a grand 18th-century, four-story mansion, is tucked away amid four acres of peaceful gardens and high stone walls.
Mr. McAreavey bought Drylaw House as a family home in 1998 and says he fell in love with it immediately. “It’s a very striking and beautiful house,” he said. “The interiors had only recently been refurbished, but the gardens were in a poor state and I have spent the past 15 years restoring them.”
Though records show a much larger Drylaw Estate existed on this site from at least the 1400s, the present house is a fine example of 18th-century design. The earliest part of the structure dates to 1718, with some remodeling in 1786. The house has been listed by the Scottish heritage organization, Historic Environment Scotland, as Category A, meaning it is of significant historic importance and cannot be altered without permission.
Drylaw House was built by the wealthy Loch family with sandstone taken from their personal quarry at nearby Craigleith. The quarry is famous for providing high-quality stone used in a number of important Edinburgh buildings from the 1600s to the early 20th century. The stone was also used to build much of the city’s elegant Georgian-era New Town.
Records from the time show that the Lochs sold the house and the quarry in 1786, to a William Ramsay. A personal account from a relative of the Loch family in 1870 states that the quarry was sold for 800 pounds just before the stones were required for the New Town expansion. The Lochs, it seems, lost a fortune of many thousands of pounds through not anticipating the Edinburgh building boom.
The main part of Drylaw House was designed as a well-proportioned and relatively simple rectangle with slate roof in a piend, or hipped, style. What is now the back of the house, a simple entrance with stone steps and iron balustrade, was, at that time, the front. The later Georgian-era remodeling moved the entrance to the other side of the house, where a five-window, two-story stone extension with Roman Doric-style detail was added, along with a large door and eye-catching fanlight window. “The house is unusual in having no formal reception room by the front entrance, because the house was effectively turned around,” Mr. McAreavey said. “Though completed in 1718, which is the early Georgian era, the original design of the house is influenced by what was known as Queen Anne-style, after the previous monarch,” who died in 1714.
Of the four stories, one is at the basement level, and has a four-bedroom self-contained guest apartment. The ground floor has three reception rooms plus kitchen, bathroom and utility room, and the two upper floors have eight bedrooms and four bathrooms in all.
In the center of the house a glass cupola allows light to flood into the stairwell, but Mr. McAreavey says that he believes this was a later addition, possibly in the 19th century.
The historic interior of the property, which is 687 square meters, or 7,400 square feet, has been kept by Mr. McAreavey much as it was when he moved in, though the kitchen and bathrooms have been completely updated with contemporary facilities.
In the stone-flagged entrance hall is one of the most unusual staircases you are likely to find. The deep stone steps are framed by a banister of oak and brass, with decorative iron balusters.
The geometric design is interrupted at regular intervals by a series of heads, also in iron, each ornamented with a variety of exotic flowers and leaves.
The wood paneling and carved wainscoting in the house is all original, as are the wooden window shutters. Most rooms have a plain design, but the dining room and study are elaborate.
The dining room has a beautiful combination of paneled walls, deep beamed ceiling and ornate wainscoting; behind the panels on one wall is a secret cupboard. The room also has a marble fireplace; above it is a rare fresco showing a landscape attributed to the French artist William Delacour, who lived in Edinburgh in the mid-18th century.
It is one of three such painted works of the period. The other two are also above the fireplaces in the drawing room and in what is the family’s media room, or den, though the artist is unknown.
There are nine fireplaces at Drylaw House, and all are working but are of differing styles in either ornamental marble or simple stone. Most are believed to date to the 18th century, with the one in the dining room listed in an inventory of additions to the décor in 1744.
Like the dining room, the second-floor study is a richly decorated room. Every wall is lined with elaborate oak wood paneling, and there are original oak window seats and shutters. “It’s the most beautiful room,” said Mr. McAreavey, who uses it as an office. “I enjoy working in it and wondering what deals were done there in the past.”
Though he still loves Drylaw House, Mr. McAreavey wants to move on and has put the house on the market with the Edinburgh property agent Coulters. It is valued at £1.7 million, or $2.5 million, but, as is common practice in Scotland, prospective buyers must submit bids on the property with offers above £1.5 million.

