OSLO — A Norwegian court on Wednesday cleared the way for the extradition of an Iraqi Kurdish imam to Italy to face terrorism-related charges.
The cleric, Najmuddin Faraj Ahmad, commonly known as Mullah Krekar, arrived in Norway as a refugee in 1991, but is not a citizen. He has been imprisoned for making death threats against numerous people, including Prime Minister Erna Solberg.
Mr. Ahmad has also praised the militants who attacked the offices of the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo last year, killing 12 people, and in November the Italian authorities named him in a multinational terrorism investigation.
Fifteen people in four countries were arrested as part of that investigation, which focused on Rawti Shax, a group that Mr. Ahmad is accused of leading and that grew out of Ansar al-Islam, a terrorist network with ties to Al Qaeda. Rawti Shax plotted to overthrow the Kurdish government in northern Iraq and to recruit militants to fight in Iraq and Syria, officials said.
On Wednesday, the Oslo District Court ruled that there were no legal obstacles to extraditing Mr. Ahmad to Italy.
“It is the opinion of the Norwegian authorities that Krekar should not be in Norway,” Ms. Solberg, the prime minister, told the newspaper Aftenposten on Wednesday. “We have no need to have him here. But the extradition process is a legal one, not a political one.”
This was not the first time the Norwegian government tried to extradite Mr. Ahmad. In 2003, when Ms. Solberg was the minister for local government, responsible for the integration of immigrants, she began proceedings to return Mr. Ahmad to Iraq because he was considered a threat to national security. The extradition was blocked on human rights grounds, because Iraq has the death penalty.
In a phone interview on Wednesday, Brynjar Meling, Mr. Ahmad's defense lawyer, said his client would appeal.
“Whether or not Italy might extradite my client to Iraq will be a vital question when we appeal this decision,” Mr. Meling said. He argued that Mr. Ahmad should instead be tried in Norway, where he also faces terrorism charges. The Norwegian authorities have said they would prefer to expel Mr. Ahmad.
Mr. Meling said that Mr. Ahmad had been in prison for making death threats against Ms. Solberg and three Kurdish men during the time the Italian authorities say he was directing Rawti Shax. After his release last year, Mr. Ahmad was closely monitored by the Norwegian Police Security Service, which is responsible for domestic security, Mr. Meling said.
In October, before the Italians announced their charges, Mr. Ahmad was again convicted in Norway of making death threats, and he has been in jail since.
“The government is boiling soup on the same old nail,” Mr. Meling said, using a Norwegian idiom for making something out of nothing.
Another Iraqi citizen in Norway, Kamil Jalal Fatah, also faces extradition to Italy under Wednesday's ruling.
Both men have three days to appeal. Any appeal would go first to a regional court and then to the country's Supreme Court. If those courts side with the district court, it is likely that Mr. Ahmad will be extradited, though the final decision will rest with the country's Justice Ministry and the government. The justice minister, Anders Anundsen, said in an interview in November that he had “no second thoughts about extraditing a person who is not a citizen of Norway to Italy,” and described Mr. Krekar as “a threat to national security.”
Mr. Anundsen's spokesman declined to comment on the case on Wednesday, saying he could not discuss an active legal proceeding.

