LYON, France — Depending on your perspective, the dream — or the nightmare — lasted nearly an hour.
That was how long it took for France, the host of the European Championships, the team with the weight of history and home weighing down on it, to emerge from its stupor. That was how long it took for Ireland, the gritty upstart with designs of a monumental upset, to see its hopes summarily squashed.
In the end, France won, 2-1, and the French — who have won each of the last two major tournaments they have hosted — will keep rolling toward a third, with a quarterfinal match against either England or Iceland awaiting next weekend. But that score, and its two gorgeous goals from Antoine Griezmann, belied the emotion of the afternoon here. It did not show how close this tournament of underdogs was to having a minnow, somehow, some way, get its jaws all the way around a whale.
The Irish, no doubt, will see it as an opportunity lost. It would be hard to say they wasted their chance because the French were, on balance, far better. They had better players, more talent, more experience. They were playing at home. They were, indisputably, the favorites.
Yet the game started with Ireland having about 40 seconds of possession, sending the ball down the field and then watching, a nation’s eyes wide, as France’s Paul Pogba tripped Shane Long as he ran across the goal. The referee did not hesitate: penalty.
“It was the worst thing that could have happened,” France’s Dimitri Payet said.
Barely a minute had been played when the call was made and barely two had passed when Robbie Brady banged his spot-kick in off the post and gave Ireland the most unexpected of edges. It was remarkable: Irish players, coaches and fans had surely played out many potential series of events in their heads before this match — a late goal, perhaps, or a victorious penalty shootout — but it seemed difficult to imagine that many of them had envisioned having to spend most of the game trying to hold on to a 1-0 lead.
The Irish fought. No one can say they did not, and their effort for the rest of the first half made the fantasy seem possible. France was all over the place, the players clearly unsettled and the fans clearly enraged. Pogba, trying to atone for his costly foul, made several dazzling dribbles and passes, but many of his teammates were invisible. Blaise Matuidi did little in midfield. Griezmann was nowhere to be found up front. Olivier Giroud looked lost.
It did not help that the Irish were the perfect combination of aggressive and irritating, as they slammed into challenges — Pogba alone was bulldozed by Long and Jeff Hendrick — but also played for time as they labored over goal kicks and tumbled with injuries that seemed to have been caused by pixies. Each minute that ticked by sent the French players flailing even more and the spectators frothing even harder. Maybe, just maybe, they thought, this might happen.
But then came halftime. A short rest. A chance to refocus. In the French locker room, Griezmann said, the players were frustrated, “kind of shouting at each other,” knowing that the game was slipping away. And it worked. They emerged from the tunnel for the second period without any of the timidity or trepidation that had bogged them down from the start. They passed crisply and fluidly. They did not bunch or crowd. The field opened up.
The first goal began when Payet sent the ball from one side to the other and Bacary Sagna swung in a looping cross. Griezmann, who stands barely 5 feet 9 inches, rose to meet it and snapped his neck. His header flew past Darren Randolph and nestled into the corner. It was swift and splendid, and Griezmann took off running in celebration. Fifty-seven minutes had been played and the French fans were, finally, euphoric.
Four minutes later, it happened again. This time it was Giroud creating as he leapt in between two Irish defenders to nod down a high ball near the edge of the penalty area. It dropped softly, easily, for Griezmann who sped forward, seized it and slotted it past Randolph into the other corner. His subsequent dance, spirited as it was, did not quite match the beauty of his score, but no one cared. Order had been restored. France was back on course.
“Another six or seven minutes without conceding, maybe we could have used that to our advantage,” said Martin O’Neill, Ireland’s coach, with a touch of wistfulness as his voice trailed off.
“The players could not have put anything more into the game,” he added. “Not an ounce left.”
For Ireland, this unraveling was about more than just this tournament. Seven years ago, France beat Ireland in a two-legged playoff for a spot in the 2010 World Cup behind a goal scored in extra time that came after Thierry Henry committed a blatant, but uncalled, hand ball — an act Henry admitted after the game, and World Cup berth, had been decided.
The Irish players said repeatedly that Sunday was not about vengeance — this was a different time, a different team — but the significance was clear. Ireland pulled off a surprise victory over Italy in the final game of the group stage to qualify for the knockout rounds and, with that boost and the start of this game, some measure of payback felt within reach.
Only then it was gone. France’s coach, Didier Deschamps, made a tactical adjustment in the second half, bringing on Kingsley Coman and moving Griezmann closer to Giroud. The first goal came. Then the second. By the time Shane Duffy was sent off for taking down Griezmann on a breakaway, even the ever bubbly Irish fans were becoming relatively quiet.
France’s nightmare had passed. Ireland’s dream was over. At the final whistle, Brady, the man who delivered the early hope, fell backward. Griezmann, the man who squelched that hope, grinned as he raised his hands.

