A something-for-everyone weekend at movie theaters delivered mixed results.
Pixar’s “Finding Dory” turned out families in droves, and “The Shallows,” a well-reviewed thriller, was a hit with horror fans and young women. But the big-budget “Independence Day: Resurgence,” aimed at the presumed undiscriminating audience, sputtered badly, and the drama “Free State of Jones,” hoping to appeal to older adults, was a dud.
The No. 1 movie in North America was again “Finding Dory” (Walt Disney Studios), which took in about $73.2 million, for a two-week domestic total of $286.6 million, according to comScore, which compiles box office data.
“Independence Day: Resurgence” (20th Century Fox), which cost at least $300 million to make and market worldwide, was a distant second, arriving to estimated ticket sales of $41.6 million. It brought in an additional $102 million overseas, including in China, where results were soft compared with other releases, despite efforts by Fox to cater to that market, including casting the Chinese model-singer Angelababy as a fighter pilot.
Fox tried to slow negative word of mouth by refusing to screen the film for mainstream critics, but audiences nonetheless smelled a stinker — perhaps aided by Will Smith, who starred in the first “Independence Day” but sat out the sequel. “Smoke and mirrors in marketing is over,” Mr. Smith said at a conference last week. With social media, he added, “people are going to know and they’re going to know globally.”
Among other new arrivals in the United States, “The Shallows” (Sony), starring Blake Lively and costing about $17 million to make, took in $16.7 million, more than double what most analysts had expected before its release. Movie studios are not known for their fast footwork, but Sony succeeded with “The Shallows” in part by moving its release earlier to take advantage of a shortage of originality at multiplexes.
“Having something different and very well reviewed was certainly a driving factor in the result, and now we’re in a great position for the Fourth of July holiday,” Josh Greenstein, Sony’s president of marketing and distribution, said by phone on Sunday.
Less successful was “Free State of Jones” (STX Entertainment), which received mostly weak reviews. Costing $50 million to make, the Civil War drama earned $7.8 million, or roughly 30 percent less than some analysts had predicted. STX noted that it relied heavily on financing partners to make the movie, which limited its own exposure.

