“We please ask that you turn your cellphones on.”
That’s the unusual instruction audience members receive at James Graham’s “Privacy,” which begins performances at the Public Theater on Saturday, July 2. Part comedy, part documentary, part lecture-demonstration and part fourth-wall smasher, “Privacy,” which had an earlier run at London’s Donmar Warehouse, explores the contemporary surveillance society and the personal trade-offs each one of us makes among freedom, comfort and security. It also asks spectators to adapt their Androids and iPhones for dramatic purpose.
(An assurance for those allergic to audience participation: All of these interactions are voluntary and many are as anodyne as a simple Google search or direction in how to take the perfect selfie.)
On a recent weekday afternoon, Mr. Graham, who wrote the book for the Broadway musical “Finding Neverland,” and the play’s director, Josie Rourke, Donmar’s artistic director, watched six actors rehearse an early scene. A character called the Writer, played by Daniel Radcliffe, has fled to New York in the wake of a bad breakup. He finds his East Village apartment invaded by Amazon packages and various experts — on personal etiquette, on legal protections, on data collection.
While Ms. Rourke, dressed in turquoise sneakers and a flowing cloak, worked on pace and rhythm, Mr. Graham, stubbled and wearing a beige surfer shirt, made notes that would likely result in new pastel-colored pages. The actors’ scripts, an assortment of blue, yellow and pink, already resembled flattened Easter baskets.
Though “Privacy” was a critical and box-office success in its 2014 London run (“a sensationally entertaining vision of our time that also gives cause for alarm,” one critic wrote) the playwright and director — the show’s co-creators — have decided to remake it entirely for its United States debut, jettisoning several dozen interviews with British politicians, computer scientists and activists in favor of their stateside counterparts. (The Donmar is coproducing with the Public.)
New interviewees, many of whom will appear as characters, include Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, a member of the Senate Select Intelligence Committee; Randi Zuckerberg, the former market development director at Facebook; and Sherry Turkle, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology specialist in technology and intimacy, who was tickled to learn that she’ll be played by the “Saturday Night Live” alumna Rachel Dratch.
Over a salad lunch in an upstairs office (“We’ve had so much kale since we’ve come to America,” Ms. Rourke said with some bemusement), the creators discussed what inspired “Privacy” and how they’re altering it for New York audiences.
Ms. Rourke, 39, and Mr. Graham, 33, both grew up in the north of England and describe themselves as private people, so private that they skitter around personal details and consented to share only a few pages from the play’s script.
Ms. Rourke wasn’t always this way. “A big part of my childhood was people telling me to stop showing off,” she said. But she later came to embrace a culture in which “it’s quite rare for people to talk freely, openly and constantly about their feelings,” she said.
Mr. Graham’s social introversion is even more acute. “I used to be private to the point where it was actually hard for relationships, for friendships, for my family,” he said. He’s had to push himself to become more open, both in his work and in his personal relationships, a trajectory that mirrors the Writer’s journey in the play. “I began to understand there’s only so far you can go unless there’s openness,” he said.
Ms. Rourke had known Mr. Graham’s earlier writing, a series of political plays, including “This House,” which played at London’s National Theater and will return to the West End this fall. An unexpectedly thrilling examination of 1970s Parliament, it relied heavily, though never ponderously, on research and interviews. Ms. Rourke had long been interested in privacy and secrecy and asked Mr. Graham if he would work with her on a new piece. She’d first imagined they might focus on the British phone-hacking scandal, but when the National Theater of Scotland announced a similar project, their research widened.
For more than a year, they hosted “a two-person book group, reading stuff back and forth,” Ms. Rourke said. They learned about how the internet works, how corporations mine data to focus their advertising, how email has altered written communication, how social media transforms individual psychology.
But once Edward Snowden released classified documents from the National Security Agency — a trove that revealed the unprecedented and unsuspected scope of government surveillance — the book club ended. Ms. Rourke suggested that they put down their research and pick up their recorders and online devices, which Mr. Graham fitted with software encryption.
Speedily, they set about interviewing their initial experts. Mr. Graham used his natural shyness and sympathy to coax people into speaking freely. “I do just want to listen,” he said. Ms. Rourke then followed with “the smash-and-grab for the bit I know we’ll need,” she said.
Mr. Graham assembled that testimony into the London version of the script, which also included satirical versions of themselves, a slightly paranoid playwright and a somewhat pushy director. For the New York production the director character has been dropped and the portrayal of the writer now seems less satirical.
Throughout the process, Mr. Graham and Ms. Rourke have worked to honor the opinions of their interviewees while also giving the play a dramatic spine and its actors plenty of rein. Ewen MacAskill, The Guardian’s defense and intelligence correspondent and one of the first journalists to have met with Mr. Snowden, is the rare figure to turn up in both the London and New York versions. Watching the London production, Mr. MacAskill was impressed with how the play uses humor and audience involvement to “make accessible the complex arguments around surveillance,” he wrote in an email.
At first he squirmed while an actor portrayed him, but he came to feel that the character “felt like me. His paunch was a bit more pronounced than mine but the rest of it was pretty accurate,” Mr. MacAskill wrote.
Though Ms. Rourke and Mr. Graham said they were pleased by the enthusiastic response to the play in London, neither considered it finished. Ms. Rourke acknowledged that the original piece had been written with “an incredibly tight deadline” and that there were “notes in the margins that we didn’t get to address.”
To help the piece to resonate with New Yorkers, they’ve now interviewed some two-dozen United States experts. Ms. Rourke noted that, “Generally, the British are unconcerned about the state having their data but reluctant to share their personal histories.” In America it’s been the opposite. The number of audience interactions have been increased and there is a more graceful emphasis on the connections between the personal choices each individual makes (what to reveal to another person, what to disseminate online) and larger political trade-offs between liberty and security.
During the London run, some critics complained that the play was ultimately too diffuse, that it didn’t advocate strongly enough for any particular stance. That’s one element that Mr. Graham and Ms. Rourke have chosen not to alter, in part because they’re still making up their minds. If they are sometimes suspicious of technology, they are also reliant on it and sometimes excited and consoled by it.
Besides, as Mr. Graham explained, the conversation around privacy and technology “is moving at such light speed and it’s going to evolve and change over the course of our lives.” He has no interest in writing “the kind of play that makes its audience think ‘we’ve lost our freedoms, we’ve lost our privacy, I’m going to go down into the basement and wear a tin hat and never interact with anyone again,’” he said. Rather, he wants to spark discussion and debate.
The conversation around privacy clearly engages Mr. Radcliffe, 26. Having been cast in the Harry Potter franchise as a preadolescent, the continuum between the private and the public is very real for him.
“People probably perceive me as someone who doesn’t have very much privacy,” he said during a rehearsal lunch break. “I still feel like I have a lot and it’s very important.” To preserve this, he keeps away from social media platforms. He’s never tried online dating; he doesn’t Instagram his meals. (As he skipped lunch in favor of a black-currant drink and a cigarette, there may not be much to Instagram.)
Mostly he finds this minimal online presence liberating. “When I see my friends I don’t know what they’ve been up to, we can have a conversation about it,” he said. But he clearly still worries about how much privacy he can and should maintain. When a reporter observed that he seemed far less neurotic than the Writer, he said, “I’m just masking that well,” adding, “There’s a lot of me in the character.”
During rehearsal that character is changing. The playwright is changing, too. As he has worked on the script, Mr. Graham has reduced his online presence, lessening his use of Twitter and Facebook. He’s no Luddite, but he’s thinking more deliberately about how he shows himself to the world — the online one, the real one.
“It’s about how much control do you have, how much consciousness do you have and how happy you are,” he said, spearing another forkful of kale. “This show is not in any way trying to say throw your cellphones away.”

