The Blackhawks' Patrick Kane on Wednesday became the first American to win the Hart Trophy as the N.H.L.'s most valuable player.
Kane, the first Chicago player to win the award since Stan Mikita in 1968, won in a runaway, capturing 121 of the 150 first-place votes.
Kane also won the Ted Lindsay Award as the league's outstanding player, as selected by his fellow players, and took home the Art Ross Trophy for the scoring title.
The Washington Capitals' Braden Holtby won the Vezina Trophy as the top goalie, and Los Angeles Kings center Anze Kopitar won the Lady Byng Trophy for gentlemanly play.
Another Blackhawk, forward Artemi Panarin, won the Calder Trophy as the top rookie, and another King, Drew Doughty, won the Norris Trophy as the N.H.L.'s best defenseman.
Washington's Barry Trotz won the Jack Adams Award as the N.H.L.'s top coach.
Russian track and field athletes who can show that they were subject to doping controls outside their home country should be able to compete in the Olympics next month under an independent flag, the World Anti-Doping Agency said.
The International Association of Athletics Federations, track's governing body, has backed allowing such athletes to participate independently of the Russian Olympic Committee. The International Olympic Committee favors keeping them with their country's delegation.
The Cardinals' Michael Wacha won his first game in nearly two months, 7-2, at Chicago, with St. Louis roughing up the Cubs' bullpen after starter Jake Arrieta left the game.
Aledmys Diaz hit a two-run homer, and Matt Carpenter had a two-run double in a five-run sixth inning after Arrieta (11-2) departed. the Cardinals completed their first three-game sweep at Wrigley Field since 1988.
AROUND THE MAJORS Marwin Gonzalez hit a tiebreaking triple in the eighth inning to help host Houston earn its fifth straight win, a 3-2 victory over the Los Angeles Angels. Adam Conley pitched a career-high eight innings, and Miami beat visiting Atlanta, 3-0, ending the Braves' six-game streak. Trevor Bauer threw a three-hitter for his second career complete game, and the host Cleveland Indians beat Tampa Bay, 6-1, for their sixth straight win.
Inbee Park, the second-ranked female golfer and a two-time winner of the United States Women's Open, said she would not take part in the Open next month in San Martin, Calif., because of a thumb injury.
NO TIMETABLE FOR WOODSTiger Woods said he had made progress in his recovery but would not set a target date for his return to competitive golf. He has not played on the PGA Tour in 10 months after undergoing two back operations last year.
The Indiana Pacers traded George Hill to Utah and acquired the Hawks' Jeff Teague in a three-team swap that sent the draft's No. 12 pick to Atlanta.
LIBERTY WIN IN TWO OVERTIMES Tina Charles had 23 points, including the first 5 of the second overtime, as the Liberty won at Atlanta, 90-79.

