Americans spend $30.2 billion a year on alternative and complementary medicines and procedures, including $1.9 billion on children 4 to 17 years old. None of it is covered by insurance.
The National Center for Health Statistics, which maintains a continuing health survey of Americans, concludes that in 2012, 55.2 million adults and 4.1 million children had at least one expenditure for some kind of complementary health care.
Almost half the money — $14.7 billion — was spent visiting practitioners like acupuncturists, homeopaths, naturopaths, chelation therapists, mind-body experts, energy healing specialists, hypnotists, massage therapists and traditional healers.
Natural product supplements (excluding vitamin and mineral diet supplements) cost $12.8 billion, and $2.7 billion was paid for self-care, including expenses for books and educational materials on diet-based therapies, guided imagery, meditation, tai chi, movement therapies, biofeedback and other treatments.
In a sense, $30.2 billion is not much money — only 1.1 percent of the nation’s total health care bill, $2.82 trillion. But the $12.8 billion spent on natural product supplements is 24 percent of the $54 billion spent out of pocket on prescription drugs, and the $14.7 billion in visits to alternative practitioners is almost a third of the out-of-pocket expenditures for visits to conventional physicians.
“The reason we like looking at cost data is because cost tells you how much people value these approaches,” said the lead author of the report, Richard L. Nahin, an epidemiologist with the National Institutes of Health.
“Someone may use a therapy when it’s free, and then not when they have to pay for it. But when people say they’re willing to pay out of pocket for alternative treatment, they really must value and believe in it.”
Unsurprisingly, the average expenditure for a family increased with income. Families with incomes less than $25,000 spent an average of $435 a year on alternative care, and those with incomes exceeding $100,000 averaged $590.
The authors acknowledge that the data depends on the recall and self-reports of the participants, but the survey’s nationally representative sample and its large size — 44,743 people older than 4 — give it considerable power.

