You recorded your Netflix stand-up special, “Baby Cobra,” while seven and a half months pregnant. There was a lot of attention for doing a bit about your miscarriage, but it's not really a joke joke. You just talk about it. It does get a lot of attention, but now I'm realizing that people who have not seen the hour might think it's my miscarriage special, and then they watch it and it's just all these poop jokes and Asian jokes.
You've said you were depressed after the miscarriage, but I've also read that you started performing right afterward, and you kept doing that bit for a while. Laurie Kilmartin, another great comic and a mom, told me that people need to know that you're O.K. in order to laugh at your tragedy. I was able to get pregnant again, so people knew that I was O.K.
Is it true that you named your daughter after the home-organizing expert Marie Kondo? I don't expect her to be the magical tidying baby, but yeah.
There aren't a lot of other female stand-up comedians, and you did stand-up for 11 years. Did you miss the company of women when you were on the road? Yes! I love all my male friends in stand-up, but I don't want to eat a Twinkie at a gas station. I enjoy Anthropologie! I like a lot of women's stuff. Women, a lot of the time, are so much funnier than men, but they just choose not to do comedy for a living.
Why do you think that is? Comedy has so much to do with honesty, and women can be more open about their emotions. Men aren't as honest about their feelings of desperation or things sagging on their body. Women choose not to do it for a living because there hasn't been enough precedent for a way it can work.
It's just logistically difficult. It is! I'm very strict about how the label ‘stand-up' is applied. I don't mean a comedic actress or someone with a funny blog. The life of a true, traditional stand-up is really unappealing for women.
What's the value in making that differentiation? Because what it requires is totally different! Stand-up requires you putting your body out there, constantly, at night. Twitter doesn't require your body to go out deep into Brooklyn on the train for 45 minutes to get paid nothing. It's not the same.
Right, and there are a lot of different reasons that a woman doesn't go out and do stand-up. Part of it just sheer safety. After you end your second set on a Friday night, for male stand-ups, it's like, “Who is going to want to sleep with me now that I did so well onstage?” Women are thinking, Dear God, I hope nobody looks at me, talks to me or follows me on my way home. And you walk back to your hotel room with your keys laced in between your fingers like Wolverine. That's no way for a woman to live. You must love stand-up so much in order to put yourself through that.
Your humor appeals beyond a single characteristic like race or gender, but you also tell a lot of jokes about being Asian. That's who I am. Talking about your race can be seen as a crutch, but I don't think talking about anything is a crutch.
There are also a lot of graphic dirty jokes, which are generally thought of as male humor. My dad was a doctor, and he would tell us a lot of nasty, funny stories from the hospital. It was funny to me when I'd go over to other people's houses and they didn't talk about intestines at the table.
Do you think that there's a benefit from being an attractive, fairly feminine woman telling those kinds of jokes? There's a line in the special about how the internet would explode if you went on Craigslist saying “tiny Asian woman seeking anal.” I mean, the internet would crash because those people want to [expletive] me. But I don't think the special's doing well because people want to [expletive] me. Like, you don't want to [expletive] me — right?

