What better time to explore the city than summer? Here are a few unusual Baedekers for New Yorkers and visitors alike.
The subtitle to “The Bowery Boys: Adventures in Old New York” (Ulysses Press, $17.95) sets high expectations: “An Unconventional Exploration of Manhattan’s Historic Neighborhoods, Secret Spots and Colorful Characters.” Happily, they are met by Greg Young and Tom Meyers, transplants from the Midwest. The authors bow to the other boroughs but focus largely on the centerpiece of the popular podcasts they began in 2007. Their easily accessible manual will not only steer you to sites you might have overlooked, but also provide ammunition for games of Trivial Pursuit.
Mr. Young and Mr. Meyers recollect the profound significance of the General Slocum steamboat disaster in 1904, reveal that George Washington and Boss Tweed lived at the same address (on Cherry Street), identify the highest building traverse in Manhattan (on Thames Street) and the shortest thoroughfare in Manhattan (Mill Lane) and a neon sign — in Hell’s Kitchen, of course — that vows: “Sin Will Find You Out.” Their witty historical field guide also pinpoints the oldest surviving bridge in New York (High Bridge) and, arguably, the oldest major man-made object in Central Park (Cleopatra’s Needle).
If you missed that painted bunting last year, you’ll be able to identify the next sighting with “Birding at the Bridge: In Search of Every Bird on the Brooklyn Waterfront” (The Experiment, $14.95), by Heather Wolf, who works for the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology and oversees the brooklynbridgebirds.com blog. Where you may see only pigeons, sparrows and the occasional sea gull, she has recorded 130 species, many of which she has beautifully photographed.
Now that you know your birds, what’s that they’re nesting in? “Central Park Trees and Landscapes: A Guide to New York City’s Masterpiece” (Columbia University Press, $24.95), by Edward Sibley Barnard and Neil Calvanese, is a lushly illustrated reference book that will help you sound smarter than your children think you are. Mr. Barnard, an author and editor, and Mr. Calvanese, who was the Central Park Conservancy’s vice president for operations, explore the park’s roots and transmutations. They elaborate on more than 200 tree species and tell which is which.
Leslie Koch is retiring as the president and chief executive of the Trust for Governors Island, but her legacy to the city is an urban oasis. Kevin C. Fitzpatrick, who has led walking tours there, has codified his narrative in “Governors Island: Adventure & History in New York Harbor” (Globe Pequot, $12.95). His book includes maps and relates the island’s role since 1624 in the founding of the city and the state (a year before the date on the official city flag), and the progress of the Trust and the National Park Service in transforming this still largely undiscovered sanctuary.
Searching for your own brand of beach reading? About dogs, psychic research, Italian culture? Check out “Fifty Specialty Libraries of New York City: From Botany to Magic” (Chandos Publishing, $33.95), by Terry Ballard, a librarian and author.
So you won’t get lost (or, in case you want to), there’s “New York in 50 Maps” (Universe, $17.95), by Françoise and Pauline Bayle, a practical, whimsical (it includes maps of cemeteries, sex, subways) and colorful compendium.
And for those who can never get enough of Brooklyn, Ellen Freudenheim offers “The Brooklyn Experience: The Ultimate Guide to Neighborhoods & Noshes, Culture & The Cutting Edge” (Rutgers University Press, $23.95).

