ATLANTA — As the Mets were rejoined Thursday by two of their most important players, Noah Syndergaard and Yoenis Cespedes, the injury-riddled team moved closer to its version of normal. The alarms that went off when Syndergaard and Cespedes left Wednesday afternoon’s game against the Kansas City Royals with injuries were calmed later that night.
“The level of relief comes from now you do know that they’ve just been checked out and there’s nothing seriously going on,” said John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager. “But it’s part of the day to day of the long season.”
Still not whole yet, the Mets dropped their fourth straight game to the Atlanta Braves with Thursday’s 4-3 loss. Matt Harvey battled with his command and allowed two runs on eight hits, but managed to record his fifth straight start of at least six innings. But reliever Addison Reed allowed a go-ahead, two-run homer to Adonis Garcia in the eighth inning. Syndergaard and Cespedes watched the game from the bench.
Syndergaard, 8-2 with a 2.08 E.R.A., has been given anti-inflammatory medication for his right-elbow discomfort. A magnetic resonance imaging exam showed that his right arm was structurally sound, so team officials said he was scheduled to make his next start on Monday against the Nationals.
Cespedes received a cortisone shot for his sprained left wrist. Although Cespedes said he was “ready right now to play,” Manager Terry Collins gave him a day off.
Collins said he was initially very concerned about Cespedes because he never says anything about injuries. Cespedes, who is batting .290 with 18 home runs, alerted the Mets’ head athletic trainer, Ray Ramirez, last week that his wrist was bothering him. But on Wednesday, Cespedes said the discomfort reached a point where he couldn’t grip the bat well.
Cespedes said he dealt with a similar wrist problem in 2013 and missed only three games. Ricco said that Dr. David Altchek, the Mets’ medical director, felt Cespedes could play through the injury. Cespedes will be monitored because injuries to a wrist or a hand can linger for hitters.
“I don’t think it’s something that will be a problem, but this game beats these guys up, so it’s something that he’s going to have to play through,” Ricco said.
Cespedes’s replacement on Thursday, the struggling Alejandro De Aza, went 2 for 4 and drove in a run. Second baseman Neil Walker drove in the Mets’ other two runs.
The Mets played down Syndergaard’s ailment as a persistent problem. In early May, Syndergaard also had elbow discomfort, but he has pitched well since.
“It’s part of the normal course of a season,” Ricco said. “And with Noah, and with these top guys, we’ve asked them to be more forthcoming, so we encourage them to tell us what’s going on and we’re going to keep a close eye on them.”
It can be a tough balance for players. Aches and pains will arise during a season, and players want to overcome them. But Collins and Ricco both said they have reminded the younger players to speak up if anything feels off.
Collins said Syndergaard, like his fellow starter Steven Matz, would cut back on his work between starts to limit wear and tear so he can stay fresh for the second half of the season. Matz, who had Tommy John surgery earlier in his career, has also complained of elbow discomfort this season, including after his start last week.
“We’re going to keep very close reins on him for sure,” Collins said of Matz.
To keep his young starters in a regular rhythm, Collins said he would rather limit their pitch counts than skip starts.
Bartolo Colon, who left his last start early because a batted ball hit his thumb, remains on track to make his next start on Sunday, Collins said. Starter Zack Wheeler (elbow) and first baseman Lucas Duda (back) still have further to go in their efforts to return.
The Mets nearly had a chance to enjoy an injury-free victory on Thursday, but the bullpen faltered. Harvey departed after six innings with the Mets leading, 3-2.
Clinging to a one-run lead, reliever Sean Gilmartin escaped an eventful seventh inning thanks to a strong throw from left fielder Michael Conforto and a tag by catcher Travis d’Arnaud to cut down a runner and save a run. The Braves’ interim manager, Brian Snitker, was ejected for erupting at the umpires following an unsuccessful challenge.
An inning later, the Mets squandered their lead. Jerry Blevins’s streak of 21 straight games without allowing a run was snapped. He gave up a single and got an out. Then Reed, appearing in his third straight game, coughed up the decisive runs on a fastball over the heart of the strike zone that Garcia sent over the left-field wall.

