ARLINGTON, Tex. — When Doug Brocail meets with Matt Bush during a game, he finds a pitcher completely at ease with his surroundings. The mound is where Bush finds peace.
“There's no heavy breathing,” said Brocail, the Texas Rangers' pitching coach. “There's no panic at all. It's like he never skipped a beat.”
Bush skipped a lot, though, and his ordeal makes late-inning pressure seem easy. Before this season, Bush spent more than three years in a Florida prison for driving under the influence and causing serious bodily injury in a 2012 crash that nearly killed a motorcyclist.
Bush's life as a professional baseball player, which began at shortstop when his hometown San Diego Padres chose him first over all in the 2004 draft, was an afterthought that gnawed at him. His career was a phantom.
“I'd be sitting in there thinking about how nice it would be to be at the beach or fishing today, or how nice it would be to be in some locker room getting ready for a baseball game,” Bush said. “You can't. There's nothing you can do about it. You're locked away. Your freedom's gone.”
Now, improbably, Bush is a vital part of the bullpen for the American League West-leading Rangers, who visit Yankee Stadium for four games this week. Bush had a 2.00 E.R.A. through Friday, with 19 strikeouts in 18 innings. He has hit 100 miles per hour with his fastball, which averages around 97.
Bush is 30. He played softball sometimes in prison, but others took it much more seriously. He did not pitch at all, even underhanded. Yet his fastball — the same one he could rev up to 96 m.p.h. in high school — never left him. It tempted Bush with thoughts of a comeback.
Roy Silver was skeptical; he had known Bush the ballplayer and was not sure he should steer his friend back to playing. Silver, a former minor leaguer, is a special assistant to the Rangers' farm director. He first met Bush in 2009, when Bush was in Toronto's camp and Silver was a volunteer at chapel services.
By then, Bush already had a long and dark past: a drunken brawl that led to an arrest shortly after the draft, and several other acts of alcohol-fueled violence. The accident in 2012, when Bush was in spring training for the Tampa Bay Rays, seemed to signal the end of whatever flickering career remained.
“I was hoping to help him salvage his life, as a convicted felon and recovering alcoholic,” Silver said. “I wanted to keep him in baseball because that's what he knows best. I was thinking about coaching or scouting for him.”
Silver, who lives in Clearwater, Fla., had once helped another troubled prospect, Josh Hamilton, by giving Hamilton a job at his baseball facility as he rehabilitated from drug and alcohol addiction. After Bush was released to a halfway house in Jacksonville, Fla., in February 2015, Silver visited him several times at a Golden Corral restaurant, where Bush worked in the bakery on a work-release program.
Bush, who wore tracking devices on his ankle and in his pocket, was allowed to ride a bicycle three or four miles to work and back. On his breaks, he would play catch in the parking lot with Silver, mostly as an exercise to talk about life. When Bush pitched to Silver — using a concrete parking block to push off with his back leg — the ball exploded from his hand, with accuracy.
Despite his reluctance at first, Silver told his bosses that Bush might really be a prospect again. General Manager Jon Daniels was not convinced.
“This wasn't a one-time deal, and this wasn't a small issue — this wasn't something you kind of chalk up as a youthful mistake,” Daniels said. “This was a history of off-field incidents and alcoholism, and a very serious incident where a man almost died. So my initial reaction, having heard the stories in the past, was, I don't know why we'd get involved with that.
“Roy basically said: ‘Listen, I get it; I'm not pushing it on anybody. I've known him since before the incident. I've been in his life, and I would be in his life if he was not a prospect. However, I'm advising you to be aware: I've seen something, and also I believe in this young man.'”
Daniels was intrigued enough to discuss the idea with his family over Thanksgiving and was encouraged by the environment the Rangers had created for Hamilton, who flourished for the Rangers and twice led them to the World Series. Bush had no agent and met with no other teams, but Silver's word helped persuade Daniels to send scouts to the Golden Corral and learn more about Bush as a person.
“With all the things that I've been through — I'm a convicted felon and everything else, you name it — it just goes to show that they're looking to win and they want to put the best talent out here,” Bush said. “Not only that, they gave me a chance to sit down and talk, see where my mind was at, where I was with my sobriety and how I was with my day-to-day life.”
Bush has apologized in a letter to his victim, Anthony Tufano, who was then 72. Tufano broke eight vertebrae in the accident and also sustained a collapsed lung and brain hemorrhaging. He was wearing a helmet, which probably saved his life, because Bush drove over his head while fleeing the scene. Tufano settled a civil lawsuit with Bush in 2013, and while Silver said the two had not spoken, Tufano has offered forgiveness.
The Rangers gave Bush another chance, and after he impressed them in spring training, he needed just 12 games at Class AA before his promotion to the majors in May. Bush's father stays with him when the team is home, and Silver travels with him on the road. Silver emphasized that Bush's recovery was just starting.
“This is a never-ending, constant battle,” Silver said. “He understands he's a public figure and his story can really affect people in a positive way. That has to be more important than throwing 100. Otherwise, this doesn't end well.”
Bush earned a measure of respect in the Texas clubhouse in his second outing, on May 15, when he hit the team's nemesis — the Blue Jays' Jose Bautista — with a pitch, which soon led to a fracas on the field. He declined to say much about that but was candid about his own fight to stay sober.
“There's plenty of people out there struggling to this day with it, thinking the same thing as me: ‘What's going on? I shouldn't be like this,'” Bush said. “Well, you've got to quit. When you have a serious problem, you need to get over it and move on. Some horrible things happened to line up for me to get well, but it's happened.”
The baseball life, which once seemed to bring out a dangerous and destructive side of Bush, now seems to suit him at last.
“There's a lot of negativity around all the time, and you can get sidetracked in all that,” Bush said. “But I stayed strong; I stayed positive. Obviously, I got sick and tired of ruining my life.”
With the Mets' David Wright almost certainly gone for the season after having surgery for a herniated disk in his neck, the Rangers' Prince Fielder offers at least cautionary optimism for a return. Fielder was the A.L. comeback player of the year last season, when he hit .305 with 23 homers after having undergone a cervical fusion for a herniated disk in May 2014.
“For me, it was just getting your strength back, as far as your shoulders and everything, because I couldn't even lift 15 pounds with my left arm,” Fielder said. “Getting that back, getting the feel — it's not that you're nervous, it's just swinging hard again. It's like, ‘Can I do it?' It's like that with anything that affects your neck, because that's a big part of hitting.”
The worst part, Fielder said, was trying to play through the pain — lying to himself to think he could do it, worrying about long-term physical damage. He started feeling better the next spring, but even then, he said, “I still didn't feel like I could swing really hard until a couple of months.”
Fielder had his surgery at age 30, and Wright is 33. Fielder is also a designated hitter, an option not available to Wright, and Fielder does not have spinal stenosis, as Wright does. Fielder acknowledged the differences but said Wright could recover.
“You can definitely come back from it,” Fielder said. “You're definitely not the same, probably. But you've just got to figure out a new way to do the same things.”
Brian Kenny raises an interesting point in his new book, “Ahead of the Curve,” which challenges conventional baseball thinking. Kenny, an MLB Network anchor, wonders why there are no women working as umpires.
“If there were no umpires of color — any color — ever to work a major league game, we would consider it unacceptable,” Kenny writes. “Why is it O.K. for half the population to be basically ineligible?”
It is a fair point, to be sure — and almost as if on cue, the Gulf Coast League last week hired Jen Pawol to be the first female umpire in the affiliated minor leagues since 2007. Pawol attended the minor leagues' umpire training academy in Vero Beach, Fla., this year after about a decade as a Division I women's softball umpire.
Pawol, 39, was a softball catcher and shortstop at Hofstra, but said she enjoyed umpiring more.
“The players and the coaches make the game happen, but it actually flows through the umpire,” Pawol said. “It's really a beautiful concept. I love the fellowship with the other umpires and the camaraderie and friendships I've made.”
Umpires can spend decades on the job, and Pawol probably has a long climb to be considered for the major leagues, which is her goal. Only six other women have been umpires in the affiliated minors, with none reaching the major leagues. Pawol rightly sees no reason for the profession to be filled solely with men.
“If you're good, you're good; if you're bad, you're bad,” she said. “In education, business, law enforcement, the military — there are a lot of places where men and women are working together. If girls and women try it and like it, I'm sure they'd do well in it. There's no reason why they wouldn't.”

