You don’t hear many people bellyaching about the servant problem these days.
In 1904, when Saki wrote, “The cook was a good cook, as cooks go, and as cooks go, she went,” this lapidary witticism would have fallen on kind ears. The bourgeoisie of that era talked about the unreliability of hired help with the same willed petulance that we reserve today for conversations about how it takes three remotes to turn on our TV.
Indeed, in today’s world, it seems as if you’d be less likely to hear about a domestic walking out than you would someone falling in love with his virtual assistant.
I recently used a virtual assistant named Amy for 10 days. We did not fall in love, but I should point out that Amy is underage because she is still in beta. (“I’d say she’s about a teenager now,” Amy’s representative told me. “Which means occasionally moody and incorrigible.”)
My relationship with Amy was less Lord Grantham/the housemaid Jane than the sorcerer’s apprentice/his bucket.
Virtual assistants like Siri, Google Now and Cortana have helped many people navigate their lives, but the next wave of helpers is likely to have more agency.
Hailing from a New York start-up called x.ai, Amy (who users can alternatively name Andrew) will set up meetings for you. Once someone has agreed to meet with you at a certain place, you cc Amy, and independently of you she’ll go back and forth with the other person to determine a mutually convenient time, and then help you to put that time on your calendar.
Winningly, Amy is (for now) free. Once her users sign up on the x.ai website, they need tangle with neither hardware nor app.
The best part of having a virtual assistant is telling your friends you have a virtual assistant; I felt as if I’d discovered a third buttock.
It was the conversational equivalent of carrying a baby through an office. “Does she sound like Scarlett Johansson in “Her”?,” one person asked me; another jested that bots are the new mimes.
Allowing someone to do your vetting requires trust. I applaud x.ai for including, at the bottom of each of Amy’s emails, the information that Amy Ingram is a form of artificial intelligence; if my correspondents had twigged to this fact on their own, they might have felt like Mia Farrow in “Rosemary’s Baby.”
Additionally, I loved that Amy sent me copies of all her correspondence for the first three meetings she set up for me. It was reassuring that Amy did not not deploy the locutions “No problem” or its hideous offspring “N.P.”
But the more I used Amy, the more I saw that she can be relied on for finding a mutually convenient time between parties, but not much more.
When I told one friend to meet me at the Starbuck’s near Bond Street, Amy provided the address for the wrong Starbuck’s; one afternoon when I invited my boyfriend, Greg, to the admittedly vague location “the beach” in August, I came home that night to six emails from Amy.
Stranger yet, when Amy sends confirmation of a meeting, her list of the meeting’s attendees includes herself, so apparently Amy will join Greg and I at the beach. Hawt.
It also intrigued me that I maintained decorum with Amy (lots of “Thanks” and “Great”) even though I didn’t have to. As one fellow x.ai user put it: “It would actually take more energy to stop myself from being civil. There’s an energetic cost to being rude or neutral or bleh.”
I wanted to test Amy with some of the vagaries that sometimes befall get-togethers. My own friends and colleagues are, of course, far, far too drenched in integrity and follow-through ever to exhibit even the tiniest glimmer of unreliability or waffling, so I created an email account for someone I called Tania.
I imagined Tania to be an impulsive, scatterbrained entertainer for children. When Amy extended to Tania an invitation for coffee at Starbucks, I had Tania write back to Amy: “I can do 3:00 on Monday, unless I only get 3 hours of sleep that night and look smeary and indistinct and have trouble following the thread of conversations. In which case Thursday or Friday are much better.”
Amy blithely set the appointment for Monday at 3:00, not telling me about Tania’s pre-emptive waffle. Oops.
Next, on the morning of the coffee date, I had Tania write Amy, “I’m working a kids birthday party directly after I meet Henry. Do you think it will be O.K. if I bring a suitcase full of baby animals to Starbucks?”
Amy forwarded me the email, saying she didn’t think she could answer it, and then told Tania she had done so, encouraging Tania to get in touch with me directly if Tania didn’t hear from me. Well done.
Finally, 16 minutes before Tania’s and my supposed appointment, I had Tania write Amy to say that she was running 15 minutes late: “A bottle of moisturizer has exploded and I am beset with goo.” Amy nimbly forwarded the message to me minutes later. Nice.
The one person in my life whom I was loath to sic Amy on was my former part-time assistant Ryan, whom I had to let go a few months ago because of budgetary downsizing.
Without using Amy, I asked Ryan to meet me for lunch at a cafe in the West Village, where I unbosomed the sordid news that I had taken on a virtual assistant. Ryan let out a mock gasp and tucked into his steamed vegetables.
I said, “I brought you to a restaurant to tell you this so you wouldn’t cry.” He thanked me for my sensitivity. I added, “I know how hard a time this is in the arts, job wise, for straight white boys.” He readdressed his vegetables. I paid for lunch to assuage my guilt.
The strangest moment I’ve had with Amy, though, came when I had her set up an appointment for a phone interview with an x.ai employee who also uses the company’s virtual assistant — in this case, Andrew — for making appointments.
After Amy and Andrew had set up the appointment, I asked Amy why I didn’t see the appointment on my calendar; strangely, she wrote back as Andrew. I thought, not only is my assistant invisible, unpredictable, occasionally moody, and incorrigible — she is also trans.
In the end, working with Amy has made me think about assistantship. Besides the nuts-and-bolts of completing tasks efficiently, what are we looking for in our helpers? Reassurance? A second opinion? All our best qualities narcissistically reflected back at us?
I want all of these, as well as someone who will smile or laugh the fifth time I refer to vegans as “vegsbians,” not to mention someone who can tell me whether or not the kids are still wearing bonnets in Williamsburg, and whether you’re meant to store your Skrillex alongside your hammer and your pliers, or alongside your vibrator and your lubricant.
All of these skills elude my simple Amy. But Amy has one thing going for her that you’re unlikely to see from any of her living, breathing counterparts: on Monday morning, Amy sends me a summary of my meetings for the week. But when I say “Monday morning,” I don’t mean at 8:23 a.m., as she’s groggily lumbering onto the L train at the Bedford stop. I mean at 3:47 a.m.
It was hugely consoling to learn that my helper was thoroughly invested in my schedule at an hour when my bladder is making a lot of troubling decisions for me. Indeed, reading the time code “3.47 a.m.” made me feel as if I was looking at one of those webby holographic depictions of tissue being regenerated on the Bionic Man’s body.
In her present state, Amy may not be able to do much beyond reduce the number of emails that lie between you and the awkward meeting at the Doppio Hut where you and your regional buyer ask each other if you’re taking any vacation days this summer. But we have the technology. We can rebuild her.

