SAN FRANCISCO — He commissioned a staggering 45 new operas, including John Adams's “Nixon in China.” His 1976 production of Gershwin's “Porgy and Bess” helped make the case for that work as an opera. He gave quite a few leading singers, including Renée Fleming, their big breaks. And he strengthened the two opera companies he ran: Houston Grand Opera, which he led for 33 years, and San Francisco Opera, where he has been for the last decade.
Now David Gockley, 72, is hanging up his impresario's cloak, retiring as San Francisco's general director in July and bringing down the curtain on a career that changed American opera.
But while his substantial contributions are being lauded widely — with an all-star “Celebrating David!” gala earlier this month at the War Memorial Opera House here, the publication of a coffee-table book about his career, and numerous articles and accolades — Mr. Gockley was in an introspective mood during a recent lunch in which he discussed the significant challenges ahead for opera.
“I couldn't do what he has ahead of him,” Mr. Gockley said of the job facing his successor, Matthew Shilvock, a protégé who has worked by his side for years. “I'm played out.”
He had just been speaking about the difficulties facing the art form to which he has devoted his life. Its shrinking footprint in mass media and popular entertainment, coupled with the decline of music education. A lack of stars who can sell out houses, especially now that recording companies no longer have huge marketing budgets. High expenses, for a skilled work force protected by powerful unions, which are going up faster than ticket prices can be raised, making fund-raising more desperate than ever. The erosion of subscriptions, the backbone of companies. And his long battle to commission more melodic, less esoteric operas — which has sometimes met with resistance from composers and disdain from critics.
While he said that his immediate plans called for sailing, sleeping late and investing in an edible marijuana-truffle business that one of his daughters started in Colorado (“I'm an investor, not an eater”), he will also continue to advise the company here as needed, as general director emeritus. Still, his stepping down is a big moment — another major changing of the American operatic guard this year, following James Levine's retirement as the music director of the Metropolitan Opera.
“David is a visionary, and he had a concept of how opera could become more American by developing an American opera repertoire, by developing opera companies that were more connected to their communities,” said Marc A. Scorca, the president and chief executive of Opera America, a service organization, who credited Mr. Gockley with prompting other companies to value new work.
Mr. Gockley, who grew up in suburban Philadelphia, caught the opera bug as a child, when he heard leading singers performing arias on television programs such as “The Voice of Firestone.” He tried to break into the business as a baritone. But when vocal struggles made him realize that he would not make it as a singer, he went to Columbia Business School and studied arts administration.
In 1972, when he was 29, he became the general director of Houston Grand Opera, then a sleepy regional company, and quickly shook things up. In those days most American companies were run by European émigrés, and at regional outfits the tendency was toward “instant opera” — featuring old favorites, singers who came with their own costumes, generic-looking drops that could be rented cheaply, and minimal rehearsal.
Mr. Gockley tried a different approach. He put on free, fully staged operas outdoors, which drew thousands. With the support of the Gramma Fisher Foundation he was able to create new productions. And most crucially, he worked to expand the operatic canon.
From the beginning he was drawn to the composer Carlisle Floyd, performing Mr. Floyd's “Susannah” and “Of Mice and Men” during his first years in Houston and going on to commission new works from him, including “Bilby's Doll” (1976), “Willie Stark” (1981) and “Cold Sassy Tree” (2000). “I thought he kind of hit the nail on the head, as a composer who could write pieces for today that audiences in large opera houses would take up,” Mr. Gockley said.
Mr. Floyd, who recently turned 90, attended the June 16 gala concert here in Mr. Gockley's honor, and received a huge ovation after the soprano Ana María Martínez sang “Ain't It a Pretty Night” from “Susannah.” Mr. Adams was there as well; Edward Nelson sang a selection from “Nixon in China,” which had its premiere in Houston in 1987.
Mr. Gockley's other commissions include Leonard Bernstein's “A Quiet Place,” Daniel Catán's “Florencia en el Amazonas” and Stewart Wallace's “Harvey Milk,” as well as works by Meredith Monk and Philip Glass. But many of the works he has brought to the stage recently have been met with decidedly mixed reviews. Over the years he has sought to stage less avant-garde, more accessible operas by composers such as Jake Heggie and Mark Adamo, whose work has been described as neo-Romantic — a move that has sometimes been controversial.
“Something that I've been pilloried for is that I've said Modernism has failed the mainstream opera establishment, at least in the U.S.A.,” he said. “I think it's too intellectual, it's too unattractive to the ear. So obviously I've tried to steer the new pieces away from that.”
The critical reaction to many of Mr. Gockley's new operas in San Francisco has been mixed, and his efforts to challenge the Met by simulcasting operas to cinemas did not succeed. But under his leadership the company has done some ambitious fare, including a “Ring” cycle; presented rising talents; and started an annual Opera at the Ballpark series, which simulcasts operas for free to some 30,000 fans at AT&T Park, the home of the San Francisco Giants.
And Mr. Gockley has helped bolster the company's finances, more than doubling its endowment, which is now more than twice the size of its $82 million annual operating budget. But while he has proved an adept fund-raiser, he lamented that he had not been able to capitalize on the Bay Area's tech boom as he had on the oil boom in Houston; he said that he thought the company would have to double its endowment again if it was to survive and thrive.
This month he announced that his 45th commission — his 10th in San Francisco — would be from Mr. Adams and Peter Sellars, who gave him “Nixon in China,” which became one of his biggest critical successes. The new opera, a piece about the Gold Rush called (with a plural that might be provocative to Puccini fans) “Girls of the Golden West,” will be staged here in 2017. Another co-commission of Mr. Gockley's, from Mr. Heggie, is planned for the 2018–19 season.
Mr. Adams said that Mr. Gockley had taken a risk by staging the world premiere of “Nixon in China,” which was co-commissioned by several companies, in Houston — noting that he had never even written for the solo voice before he began composing the opera.
“I can say, honestly, that over the years he's tried to establish what he feels is an American operatic tradition, and I think that's a noble endeavor, even when I don't always agree with his choices,” Mr. Adams said, adding that when he began working on his new opera with Mr. Sellars, their first thought had been of taking it to Mr. Gockley and San Francisco.
Mr. Gockley has also reached back for underperformed American works. In 1975, Houston became the first professional opera company to stage a full production of Scott Joplin's “Treemonisha,” just as the ragtime revival was taking off. It was a hit, and went on to Broadway. That paved the way for the company's pathbreaking production of “Porgy and Bess,” which it staged for the American bicentennial in 1976. It went on tour, ran on Broadway and was recorded — earning the company both Tony and Grammy Awards.
Establishing “Porgy” as a secure part of the operatic repertory is one of his proudest achievements. Hanging on the wall of his office is a poster of a 1996 “Porgy and Bess” from the Teatro alla Scala in Milan, which notes that the production is “della Houston Grand Opera.”
Mr. Gockley has been an institution builder — he oversaw the construction of the Wortham Theater Center in Houston, which opened in 1987, and in San Francisco he built the Diane B. Wilsey Center for Opera, which opened this year next door to the opera house and includes a 299-seat flexible theater.
And he has been a career builder. Ms. Fleming, who appeared at his farewell gala, first sang two of her signature roles, the Countess in Mozart's “The Marriage of Figaro” and the Marschallin in Strauss's “Der Rosenkavalier,” in Houston. The formidable bass-baritone Eric Owens sang at the gala as well — one of several alumni in attendance from the Houston Grand Opera Studio program that Mr. Gockley co-founded with Mr. Floyd to nurture young singers.
At the lunch, Mr. Gockley lamented that he had failed to secure co-producers for most of the new operas he had done here, which he said had mostly “just had their premiere and kind of gone out of consciousness.”
But he said it was not always easy to know what would eventually enter the repertory, noting that when he left Houston he did not yet know that “Nixon in China” and “A Quiet Place” would come to be seen as successes.
“They got so battered when they were new, and they had no momentum going at all, so I said, well, those are two dogs of my times,” he recalled. “But sometimes surprises happen.”

