There have long been apps for making cocktails. But now, there’s one that’s as nice-looking as it is authoritative, thanks to its founding partners: a CFDA Award-winning Instagrammer and a James Beard Award-winning bartender. The Liquor Cabinet, available on iTunes beginning today, offers classic recipes tested and refined by Maxwell Britten, who slung drinks at Williamsburg’s Maison Premiere when it was recognized for its Outstanding Bar Program at the Beard awards earlier this year.
Patrick Janelle, who won the CFDA’s first Fashion Instagrammer of the Year Award two years ago (@aguynamedpatrick), started the Liquor Cabinet with his brothers as a creative agency centered around cocktails, before bringing on Britten. One of their first projects was to reimagine the minibars at the Roxy Hotel in TriBeCa. “Patrick and I travel a lot and stay in so many different hotels, and there was always the urge to hack these minibars and make them more usable and versatile,” says Britten. Together, they curated a set of spirits designed to accommodate a broad range of tastes — and create a diverse set of drinks. (The new app includes a section devoted to bottles of spirits, researched and reviewed by Britten.)
For a recent backyard cocktail party in Brooklyn, Britten put a twist on a summer classic, the Paloma cocktail, using an unusual ingredient: Gordy’s Fine Cocktail Brine. The resulting drink — named after the Paloma’s birthplace, La Capilla in Jalisco — melds the stuff with mezcal, Curaçao, watermelon and grapefruit. According to Janelle, “the strong, heavy acid flavor of the brine seems very of the moment, as food and cocktails are not so even and well-balanced right now, but are tending toward stronger, bolder flavors.” Britten served the drink with slices of watermelon balanced on each glass. He handed them out, zested some lime on top and sprinkled over Maldon salt. Below, he shares the recipe for the new concoction, and the original on which it was based (as it appears in the app).
1 ½ ounces Mezcal Amaras ¾ ounce Pierre Ferrand Curaçao ½ ounce Gordy’s Cocktail Pickle Brine 1 ounce watermelon juice ½ ounce fresh grapefruit juice ½ ounce fresh lime juice 1 small watermelon wedge, for garnish Lime, for garnish Maldon sea salt, for garnish
1. Pour the first six ingredients in a shaker tin, add ice and shake well.
2. Fine strain the drink into a double rocks glass filled with ice.
3. Balance the watermelon triangle on top of the glass. Grate fresh lime zest on top using a microplane, and then sprinkle with Maldon salt. Enjoy.
1 ¾ ounces Herradura Silver tequila ½ ounce fresh lime juice Grapefruit soda Salt, for garnish
1. Add the tequila and lime juice to a shaker. Shake without ice.
2. Line the rim of a Collins or double rocks glass with salt, and add ice. (Traditionally this would be served in a Collins glass, but ours doesn’t fit the large wheel of grapefruit we like to garnish the drink with.)
3. Pour the contents of the shaker into the glass, and top with the soda. Enjoy.

