Donald J. Trump has hired a veteran political strategist and former adviser to Senator Ted Cruz as his de facto communications director, a significant move as Mr. Trump shifts toward a more traditional campaign structure.
Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, has brought on Jason Miller, of Jamestown Associates, to oversee his campaign's interactions with the news media, according to a news release from the campaign. Until now those interactions have been done through a lone spokeswoman.
Mr. Miller's hire was first reported by Bloomberg Politics. It signals a new phase of Mr. Trump's campaign, after a major shake-up that included the ouster of his campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski.
An aide to Mr. Trump did not respond immediately to a request for comment. But the people briefed on the hiring said it was the first in a series of coming changes to beef up the team.
Mr. Miller worked for the presidential campaign of Mr. Cruz, the last-standing potentially serious challenger to Mr. Trump in the primaries. Mr. Cruz withdrew from the race after losing the Indiana primary on May 3. Mr. Trump's description of Mr. Cruz as “Lyin' Ted” helped sink his candidacy.
Mr. Miller is a veteran of a number of campaigns, including Rudolph W. Giuliani's presidential effort in 2008. He has a deep reservoir of relationships with national reporters.
His firm, Jamestown Associates, used to employ Ken Kurson, the editor of The New York Observer, which is owned by Mr. Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner.
The firm earned notoriety in the 2014 midterm elections when it was banned from work by the National Republican Senatorial Committee because it represented insurgent challengers to Republican senators in primaries. That outsider approach dovetails with Mr. Trump's own message in the presidential race.
When in 2011 Mr. Trump considered running for president, one of his advisers put together a theoretical plan for a campaign that included Mr. Miller as the campaign manager. In that race, the person imagined as the New Hampshire state director was Mr. Lewandowski.
The campaign is also adding Michael Abboud as a communications coordinator, helping with a newly formed rapid response operation. And Alan Cobb, who was a close ally of Mr. Lewandowski, has been reassigned as the director of coalition groups.
Mr. Trump said in a news release that he was “constantly building a superior political team” for the fall general election against Hillary Clinton.

