On Tuesday afternoon, more than a dozen members of the ensemble of “Shuffle Along” gathered at the Midtown Manhattan headquarters of Actors’ Equity, cradling trophies in the shape of gold stars as they were honored as the best chorus on Broadway.
Two days later, the cast was again summoned to a gathering, this time at the Music Box Theater, just before curtain for the Thursday evening show. And this time, the news was bad: The musical, while still selling nearly a million dollars in tickets a week, would close July 24.
[ Read our review of ‘Shuffle Along’ ]
The turnabout in fortunes had a simple explanation, according to the producers: That was the date that the show’s best-known star, Audra McDonald, was beginning a maternity leave, and the show’s sales had dropped precipitously in anticipation of her departure.
The performer who was to succeed Ms. McDonald, the musician Rhiannon Giddens, was despondent. “My heart is broken,” she said on Twitter. “Completely and utterly. Now to pick up the pieces.”
Others were unhappy too. Adrienne Warren, nominated for a Tony for her performance, tweeted an emoji of a broken heart. Ms. McDonald jumped into the social media conversation, describing herself as “devastated.”
The show’s lead producer, Scott Rudin, said in a statement Thursday that ticket sales were to blame: “The need for Audra to take a prolonged and unexpected hiatus from the show has determined the unfortunate inevitability of our running at a loss for significantly longer than the show can responsibly absorb.” He declined to talk further on Friday, and other producers of the show did not respond to requests for comment; Ms. McDonald also declined to be interviewed.
But the closing was the talk of Broadway, because the show, with a full title of “Shuffle Along, or the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed,” involved a large number of celebrated artists, including a Tony-winning director and book writer, George C. Wolfe, and the choreographer Savion Glover, as well as the performers Brian Stokes Mitchell, Billy Porter and Brandon Victor Dixon. The show, about the development and aftermath of an early all-black musical on Broadway, was nominated for 10 Tony awards, but won none.
“I’m quite surprised, given the pretty favorable reviews, and the rest of the cast — I wasn’t sure it was a hit in the sense of whether it would recoup, but I did not think Audra’s departure would result in such a falloff,” said John Breglio, an entertainment lawyer and author of “I Wanna Be a Producer.”
Mr. Rudin has made tough decisions before. This month, he left a British musical adaptation of “Groundhog Day,” which he planned to help bring to Broadway, citing unhappiness with the way his role in the project had evolved. In 2013, he announced he would close “The Testament of Mary” on the same day it was nominated for a best play Tony award, citing poor ticket sales.
The “Shuffle” announcement comes during a tough period for many Broadway producers. Of the 11 new musicals that opened during the theatrical season that just ended, only four — “Hamilton,” “On Your Feet!,” “School of Rock” and “Waitress” — survive.
Ms. McDonald, who with six Tony awards is one of Broadway’s biggest stars, had always planned to take time away from “Shuffle” this summer — before she became pregnant, she had been scheduled to spend three months in London reprising her role in “Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar & Grill.”
But her London leave was scheduled to begin in June, so she would have been gone primarily during the summer, when Broadway is flush with tourists; her maternity leave was scheduled to begin a month later, and to last twice as long, meaning the show would have to survive without her through the fall and winter.
Some fans of the show were angry about the closing, suggesting that the producers should have been better prepared, or should have supported it for longer given its significance to African-American theatrical history. Others were unhappy with the focus on Ms. McDonald’s pregnancy.
“It was just mishandled all around,” said Andrew Shade, the founder and editorial director of BroadwayBlack, a website that champions black performers and creators in theater. “We knew she was leaving to go do ‘Lady Day,’ and maybe now she’s going to be gone a little longer, but the show was very well done, and it bothers me that we’re losing a great gem.”
But others saw the decision as smart producing. The $12 million show will close at a loss, but by closing next month, it is likely to be able to return some portion of that money to investors, because thus far it has been making an operating profit each week.
“As a commercial producer, you’re responsible to your investors, and this is probably a better decision than losing all that money,” said Steven Chaikelson, a professor of theater management at Columbia University.

