WIMBLEDON, England — For Amra Sadikovic, a 27-year-old Swiss player who is facing Serena Williams in the first round Tuesday, playing at Wimbledon has been a dream 18 years in the making — except for a 14-month stretch in which she gave up on it entirely.
Sadikovic, 27, began playing tennis at age 9 but fell out of love with the game two years ago, as the strain and pressure of life on the lower rungs became too much.
“I stopped, and I didn't think about coming back, to be honest,” Sadikovic said. “The last few months I was playing, I was standing on court, and I didn't enjoy it at all. I didn't have fun any more on court, and also during practice I was like, ‘Ugh, what am I doing here?' It didn't feel right anymore.”
Sadikovic's ranking had stalled well outside the top 200, and the meager pay weighed on her.
“That's why I took the decision to stop — and I don't regret it,” she said.
When she stopped playing, Sadikovic found work as a tennis coach and fell in love with the sport again.
“It was so much fun and definitely something I want to do again,” she said. “But during this time, I realized that I hadn't enjoyed the time I was playing as a pro. I had been worrying about everything instead of just playing and enjoying it because it's such a big privilege, and I see that now.”
After 14 months away from the sport, Sadikovic returned to the tour, but all of her ranking points had expired.
“I had to start from zero, and I was asking myself, ‘Do you really want to do this?' — because I had such a great job, and I had a nice life,” she said. “I was well paid; I didn't have to worry about everything. Everyone was like, ‘Why would you risk that at this age?' But I didn't feel like I was too old.”
Sadikovic drew inspiration from another Swiss player, the 11th-ranked Timea Bacsinszky, who returned to the tour reinvigorated after her own long hiatus and achieved new career heights.
With a similarly newfound appreciation for the game, Sadikovic is achieving her best results so far. Her ranking reached a career high of 148th, and she stormed through the Wimbledon qualifying draw without dropping a set to earn her first spot in a Grand Slam main draw.
“I'm more relaxed, and I see everything clearer,” she said. “My game didn't change much, but I'm more calm on court now and not stressed at all.”
She added: “I look differently at life now. Before, I thought everything always has to be secure. I was afraid to take any risk, and that has changed so much now.”
Sadikovic also draws strength from her parents, Bosnians who fled war-torn Sarajevo for Switzerland and initially struggled to make ends meet. While her father worked as a stonemason, the family was forced into crowded accommodations while settling into a life in Switzerland.
“I know from the stories what my parents went through,” Sadikovic said. “When they moved to Switzerland — they didn't go through the war, I'm happy about that — but they had one room and 15 people were sleeping in that room, and my mom had to take care of everyone. She had to cook for everyone. There were hard times, and that helps me to push through my hard times.”
Williams, whom Sadikovic has watched on television for years, poses a new and different challenge.
“When I saw her at first, of course I was impressed,” Sadikovic said. “To me, she was like — I don't mean it in a bad way — like a monster. She's there, and so confident, that's how it is. She's the greatest player ever, so it's an honor to play her.”
Patrick Mouratoglou, Williams's coach, said he had never seen Sadikovic play and would rely on YouTube videos to scout her. After he and the rest of the tennis world get their first good look at her Tuesday, Sadikovic said she hoped there was much more to come, especially after she soaked in the ambience of Centre Court, where she and Williams will play.
“This is the first time I'm here on site, and when you get to see this, you tell yourself it's worth fighting for,” she said. “This is a dream coming true. When I go back home after this tournament, I'm going to put myself to work. Work, work, work — because it's so worth it.”

