ST.-DENIS, France — The first two days of the knockout rounds at the European Championships were wholly, and remarkably, forgettable. The Wales-Northern Ireland game was drab. Croatia-Portugal was dreary. France offered just one decent half against Ireland. Belgium-Hungary felt like a limp.
But then came Monday. Italy-Spain was a game that sounded like a final, smelled like a final, felt like a final, but it was, instead, here at Stade de France in late June as opposed to two weeks from now in the event's showpiece.
It did not matter. The teams played with verve and pace and frenzy all the same, and Italy's 2-0 victory over Spain — which eliminated the two-time defending champion and set up a quarterfinal against Germany, the reigning World Cup champion — was remarkable both for what it was (nearly comprehensive mastery) and also for what it was not (a defensive slog).
For years, Italy has been known for its back line, its ability to pile in and absorb an opponent's attacks without bending. There is even a name for the style, Catenaccio, which roughly translates to “door bolt.” The Italians, for a long time, were soccer's equivalent of a vault. Sturdy, sure. Safe and secure. Just not always that much to look at.
Not anymore. Antonio Conte, Italy's coach, who will be departing after this tournament to take over at Chelsea, has restyled the national team, and his players pushed forward from the start against Spain, probing and testing a shaky defense and peppering goalkeeper David De Gea.
The game's decisive goal came from Giorgio Chiellini in the 33rd minute. He pounced on a rebound and worked the ball over the line amid a scramble in front of the net, and it was a fair reward for Italy's aggressiveness. The Italians did not sit back, did not soak up anything. Daniele De Rossi sprayed pinpoint passes. Eder took off on penetrating runs. Mattia De Sciglio swung in crosses. Emanuele Giaccherini flung himself into a bicycle kick.
Afterward, Conte walked into the Italian locker room and gave his players a round of applause. He was proud of their bravery, he said, proud of their pluck.
“We have proven that Italy is not all about Catenaccio,” Conte said, a wide smile on his face. “This is a team that plays football. We are very organized defensively, but we are equally organized going forward.”
He added: “Often, people think Italy are just a defensive side. But that's not the case.”
Spain's players were downcast. Taken in combination with a disastrous World Cup in Brazil two years ago, in which the Spaniards failed to get out of the group stage, this result felt like the final moment in what Spain's coach, Vicente del Bosque, called “a golden era.” Spain sandwiched two European titles, in 2008 and 2012, around the World Cup championship in 2010, dominating world soccer with an inimitable style of passing that felt simultaneously symphonic and lethal.
In recent years, however, some key players (notably midfielder Xavi) have retired from the national team while other stars have started to show their age, leaving the current Spanish team as a shell of its former self even as Spanish club teams have dominated European club competitions.
The best player on the field for Spain on Monday was De Gea, who made five saves and single-handedly kept his team in the game as Italy surged in the first half. Andrés Iniesta, who has been a wizard for Barcelona, was uncharacteristically absent. Sergio Busquets was largely invisible. There was no thrum to the Spanish attack, and little purpose until late in the match.
Del Bosque, 65, is expected to step down this summer, and Spain seems likely to go through a reshaping before World Cup qualifying begins in the fall.
“I'm lost for words,” Iniesta said. “There's nothing else to it. It's time to think about the future.”
Italy, understandably, will quickly turn its focus to Germany — another mouthwatering matchup — but it will also allow for a moment of revelry. The history between Italy and Spain is not necessarily fraught or extensive, but it is bloody. In 1994, the Italians knocked out Spain in the quarterfinals of the World Cup in Foxborough, Mass., a game that featured a late — and uncalled — elbow from Mauro Tassotti that left Spain's Luis Enrique gushing with blood and a nation enraged.
Tassotti received an eight-game suspension, but it was not until 2008 in Austria, when Spain defeated Italy in a shootout on its way to winning the Euros, that Spain earned some measure of vengeance and a trend began. Four years later in Ukraine, Spain thrashed the Italians, 4-0, in the final of the Euros, a beating that was not as bloody as the 1994 clash but was pulverizing in a different sort of way. Then Spain beat Italy again, in a shootout, at the 2013 Confederations Cup in Brazil.
“Vienna, Kiev, Fortaleza — we needed to get revenge,” Chiellini said. “We should have killed the game off earlier; that could have been a regret. The last 15 minutes we really suffered, but we've got a saint behind us who saved everything.”
He was referring to Gianluigi Buffon, the Italian captain and goalkeeper, who had little to do in the first half but made diving saves to deny an Iniesta volley, a long-range shot from Gerard Piqué and, most spectacularly, another attempt from Piqué from just a few yards out in the final minute of normal time. As Spain pushed even more desperately, Graziano Pellè finished off a break in stoppage time to add an insurance goal.
When it was over, Buffon and Iniesta — two icons — exchanged jerseys before Buffon and his teammates held hands and ran toward their fans together. They could have been frustrated by their tournament draw — Italy finished first in its group but ended up on the side of the bracket with Spain, Germany and England — yet they were bolstered by the opportunity instead.
The European champions are gone. The World Cup champions lie in waiting. The Italians are unbowed.
“This victory can give us confidence,” Conte said, “but it cannot quench our thirst for amazing people.”

