The Nets will be long on cap space heading into free agency, but they will be short on familiar faces after reports that a deal was struck on draft day in which the team sent Thaddeus Young to the Indiana Pacers for the draft rights to Caris LeVert, a shooting guard from Michigan.
While the deal — the first big trade by the team's new general manager, Sean Marks — has not been confirmed by the teams, LeVert discussed it at the draft and Young confirmed it on Twitter when he thanked the Nets for their support and expressed his excitement at joining the Pacers.
Beyond Young's goodbye, most of the Nets remained quiet about the trade on Twitter (possibly because it was not yet confirmed), but the Nets' Chris McCullough posted some encouraging words for the soon-to-be rookie. McCullough wrote in the post, “Welcome to my city @CarisLeVert & our organization.”
In the middle of a long rebuilding process, the Nets are now expected to enter the free-agency period with about $50 million to spend, though they may not be a marquee destination considering the state of the roster and the team's poor record last season.
Brooklyn's core consists of Brook Lopez, a legitimate force at center, and a series of players like Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, Bojan Bogdanovic and Sean Kilpatrick. The group is young and each of the players seems to have the potential to be good, but they hardly qualify as stars on the level of Brooklyn's failed experiment to win with Deron Williams, Kevin Garnett, Paul Pierce, Joe Johnson and Lopez.
How LeVert will fit in is not known. After being projected as a mid-second-round pick, he was selected by Indiana (apparently at the behest of the Nets) at No. 20.
LeVert is a sweet-shooting, 6-foot-7 combo guard, but he is working his way back from a foot stress fracture. He confirmed at the draft that his recovery would most likely prevent him from playing in a summer league, but talked optimistically about being able to play next season.
LeVert seemed happy for a chance to play in Brooklyn and was not worried about his recovery or the state of the Nets' roster.
“I'm a long-term thinker, a long-term type of guy, always have been,” LeVert said. “I'm just excited.”
To get LeVert, and free up cap space, the team gave up Young, who was their second best player this past season. While he averaged 15.1 points and 9 rebounds, Young has been a mixed bag of production, with strengths and weaknesses on both ends of the court. He was owed a guaranteed $25 million over the next two seasons and had a $13.8 million player-option for 2018-19.
Beyond player and team options, the Nets now have no financial commitments beyond the 2017-18 season, which is a stark contrast to the way things were run under Marks's predecessor, Billy King, who presided over a team that seemed to perpetually be in financial crisis but underachieved relative to payroll each season.
Now the question is which free agents might be willing to take the large sums the Nets can spend.
The list of top-tier free agents is likely to include stars like Kevin Durant, Andre Drummond, Bradley Beal, DeMar DeRozan and even Dwight Howard, the frequent rumored trade target for the Nets. But any of those players would have to be considered a long shot to sign with a team that won 21 games last season.
REBOUNDS
In a separate trade with the Utah Jazz, the Nets acquired the draft rights to Isaiah Whitehead, the No. 42 pick in this year's draft, in exchange for the draft rights to Marcus Paige, the No. 55 pick, and cash. Whitehead, a Brooklyn native, averaged 18.2 points and 5.1 assists last season for Seton Hall.

