It was late April, and the ballerina Alessandra Ferri was rehearsing the balcony pas de deux from Kenneth MacMillan’s “Romeo and Juliet” with Herman Cornejo in American Ballet Theater’s Lower Manhattan studios. The liquid fluidity, gorgeously arched feet and dramatic intensity that have characterized Ms. Ferri’s long career were all in evidence, and onlookers were watching with rapt appreciation.
Then, suddenly, the pair tangled up during a complicated lift. Ms. Ferri slid awkwardly down Mr. Cornejo’s back, landing in a heap.
“What happened?” she called out with a laugh, her feet in the air. “It’s my fault,” Mr. Cornejo said. “You know what you’re doing!”
Ms. Ferri does know what she is doing. On Thursday night, she is returning, at 53, to the Metropolitan Opera House stage to dance, for just one performance, the teenage Juliet — probably her most famous role — which she first danced at 21, in 1984, as a principal at the Royal Ballet.
[ Alastair Macaulay’s primer on Kenneth MacMillan’s “Romeo and Juliet” ]
“I was a little afraid of doing it again,” Ms. Ferri said after the rehearsal. “I went through many stages of indecision and fear and excitement. Then at one point, I thought, I’m only alive once: Why not?”
The suggestion came from Kevin McKenzie, the artistic director of Ballet Theater, where Ms. Ferri was a principal dancer for 22 years before she retired in 2007. “It was fascinating to see her career blossom again after she had been so definite about stopping,” Mr. McKenzie said, referring to appearances Ms. Ferri has made over the last few years in works by Martha Clarke, Wayne McGregor and John Neumeier. “I said: ‘You’re dancing in London, Hamburg, Italy. Why don’t you perform with us?’”
Ms. Ferri said she had not intended to perform again after retiring. “I wanted to spend time with my family, and it seemed like the right decision,” she said. “I was happy. I woke up in the morning and did not want to exercise!” But she began to feel as if she were switching off mentally. “I felt like part of me was locked away — a huge part of me. I had been dancing, been wanting always to dance, since I was 3 years old.”
She started going to Pilates and yoga, and then, slowly, back to ballet class. “As soon as I started dancing again, my brain reconnected,” she said. Soon after, she bumped into Ms. Clarke, who reminded her that they had talked about working together. “I said: ‘Let’s do it now. I don’t care what it is,’” Ms. Ferri said.
The outcome was “Chéri,” a dance-theater piece based on a Colette tale about an older woman and her younger lover. Ms. Clarke suggested that role be played by Mr. Cornejo, an Argentine Ballet Theater principal who had studied with Julio Bocca, perhaps the most important partner of Ms. Ferri’s career. Mr. Cornejo and Ms. Ferri had intersected briefly at Ballet Theater, but had never danced together.
“I grew up watching Alessandra from the wings, dancing with Julio,” Mr. Cornejo, 35, said in a recent telephone interview. “When Martha said she was going to be in ‘Chéri,’ I said yes right away. Then we had a huge connection as partners. Being onstage with an artist like Alessandra gives you so much freedom; you can almost improvise, because she can always understand and follow what you are doing.”
After seeing “Chéri,” Mr. McGregor asked Ms. Ferri be part of his new, full-length “Woolf Works” for the Royal Ballet. (The Italian-born Ms. Ferri was a principal at the Royal Ballet early in her career, after a stint at the Royal Ballet School.)
“Wayne’s piece was the first one that was really demanding physically when I came back to dance,” Ms. Ferri said. “He has an extreme and particular way of moving, which took me a while to understand, and you can really only get in shape for it by doing it.”
Dancers have relatively short careers. Because of the demands the profession makes on the body, retiring in the mid-40s — as Ms. Ferri did — is considered a very good run. Margot Fonteyn, who danced Juliet at 56, made her final stage appearance at 60. But that’s very unusual; mostly, injuries or declining physical capacities prevail earlier.
Ms. Ferri said she felt lucky to have a good body for ballet, supple and strong, with few injuries apart from an ankle problem. Her full-on performance in “Woolf Works” caused a sensation, with British critics marveling at her technical capacities and theatrical prowess. Soon after, she began to work with Mr. Cornejo on a program of works by several choreographers, which they performed in New York in March.
Working on “Romeo and Juliet” again was, Ms. Ferri said, a further step in regaining strength and technique. She added: “When a piece is created on you, even if the steps are hard, they are made on your body. But here, the steps are there and you must do them.”
Asked how she thought her interpretation had changed, she said that she felt her Juliet was “quieter, with a delicacy that I didn’t have when I was younger.”
Ms. Ferri said that she was open to dancing other ballet roles again (“Manon is actually less hard than Juliet for me”) but that she had no specific plans. Her calendar is crammed for another year, with revivals of “Woolf Works” and Mr. Neumeier’s “Duse,” and more performances of her program with Mr. Cornejo.
“After that, I don’t know,” she said. “When I retired, it was the end of my career, and that’s still true. My career is over. I have gone back to the pure joy of what I feel when I dance.”

