It seems remarkable — given its perpetually deep well of talented players, its longstanding global cachet, and the sheer number of international soccer competitions — that Argentina has not won a major soccer tournament since 1993. That is not to say there have not been chances; Argentina has lost major finals the past two summers. The team’s next chance comes Sunday, in the final of the Copa América Centenario in East Rutherford, N.J.
This time, the opponent will be Chile, the defending champion. To their credit, the Argentines, the world’s No. 1-ranked team, have looked invincible this summer. They have 18 goals in their five victories in the tournament. They have Lionel Messi, whose play has reiterated his case to be called the world’s best player.
But will Argentina, and Messi, at last break through? Weighing on them will be the disappointment of 23 years, an uninterrupted string of heartbreak, scandal, squandered talent, close calls and epic calamity.
The Last Trophy
Argentina’s last taste of tournament victory came in 1993, at the Copa América in Ecuador. Gabriel Batistuta, then 24, scored two goals in the final, including the 74th-minute winner, in a 2-1 victory over Mexico. Batistuta, nicknamed Batigol, would grow into one of the best strikers of his generation, amassing 54 goals for his country — a record that was surpassed only last week, when Messi scored his 55th goal in Argentina’s 4-0 rout of the United States in a semifinal.
The Drought Begins
Six hours before Argentina’s final group-stage game at the 1994 World Cup, Diego Maradona, then 33 and the team’s captain, was kicked out of the tournament after testing positive for five variants of the banned stimulant ephedrine. “My soul is broken,” said the mercurial Maradona, who had led his country to the World Cup title in 1986 and back to the final four years later. Argentina, which had gotten off to a glittering start in the 1994 event in the United States, lost its next two games and tumbled out in the round of 16. “As far as I’m concerned, soccer has come to an end,” Maradona said upon returning home. “I can’t stand watching it, and I don’t even want to play anymore.”
An Early Exit in 2002
Boasting a bevy of experienced stars, Argentina was the most feared team in the 2002 World Cup’s so-called Group of Death, but failed to make it out of the group stage. The tears flowed in Miyagi, Japan, when Argentina could muster only a draw against Sweden in its last game, sending the players on an unexpected early flight home. “This is the worst day of my life,” the star midfielder Juan Sebastián Verón said after the loss.
Close Calls in the Copa América
For Argentina, nothing hurts quite like losing to Brazil. The countries have one of the biggest rivalries in international sports, and it is at a fever pitch in soccer. The 2004 and 2007 Copa América tournaments, then, were maddening for La Albiceleste, as the Argentine team is known. In the 2004 final in Peru, Argentina snatched a 2-1 lead in the 87th minute only for Brazil to tie the score on a goal by Adriano in the 93rd and then prevail in a penalty-kick shootout.
The teams met again in the next Copa final, three years later in Venezuela. This time, Brazil cruised to victory, 3-0, brushing aside the previously surging and heavily favored Argentines, who had scored 16 goals in their five games. Four years later, Argentina tried again, this time with the benefit of being the host and with Messi now a central figure of the team. It went even worse; Argentina was booed by its own fans in several games and lost in the quarters to its other regional nemesis, Uruguay.
Two Recent Heartbreakers
A new generation of superstars, led by Messi, now the captain, has given Argentina new hope. The country won the 2005 and 2007 Under-20 World Cups and took the gold medal at the 2008 Olympic Games, which doubles as FIFA’s under-23 world championship. Yet Argentina has continued to fall short in major senior-level competitions. It was on the brink of realizing all those years of potential at the 2014 World Cup final in Brazil before Mario Götze’s 113th-minute goal instead propelled Germany to a 1-0 win in the final. “The pain will be for life because this was our opportunity,” defender Javier Mascherano said. A year later, at the Copa América in Chile, Argentina collapsed in a penalty shootout against the host nation, extending its Sisyphean frustration at least one more year.
On Sunday, it gets another chance to end it.

