Opened just in time for the start of men’s fashion shows (and soon, couture) in Paris, the two-month-old restaurant Le Petit Keller offers a fresh perspective on healthy cuisine. The Japanese menu was designed by Kaori Endo, who was a chef at Rose Carrarini’s Rose Bakery in the late aughts before launching Nanashi in 2010, a Parisian bento empire that drew in an equally fashionable crowd for its wholesome bentos and delicate desserts. And Endo co-owns Le Petit Keller with her husband, the wine shop owner Michael Lemasle, who curated the restaurant’s list of small-production, natural French bottles.
Endo explains that the kind of winemakers they support “extract something interesting and alive” from the land and the natural environment. “I like to cook like that, too,” she says. “I like to stay very simple.” In the gently refurbished space on rue Keller, plates include mackerel donburi sprinkled with bluebottle flowers, cucumbers beside a miso mayo dip and shittake mushrooms marinated in syrah vinegar. Meats, like tender beef nerves or roasted lamb shoulder, are plated to share and play a mostly supporting role to the vegetables. “I think of cuisine first as something beneficial, not as a method of explaining one’s art or one’s ego,” Endo says. “I think always of the person who’s eating, and I’d like it to do him or her well.” It’s a sentiment shared by her husband: “I like wines that are simple and digestible, which work well with Kaori’s cuisine,” he says.
In the 13 years since opening his cramped wine shop Crus & Découvertes, Lemasle has seen steadily growing interest in the additive-free, unfiltered, low-sulfur wines he began to champion in the early 2000s. He rarely has to explain what natural wine is anymore. At Le Petit Keller, his more than 40 selections — all sourced directly from the winemakers — are as light as Endo’s simple, French-inflected Japanese home cooking.
But not everything at Le Petit Keller is health conscious. For the dessert menu, Endo has created a richer, denser version of her classic matcha cake, which was originally published in her 2008 cookbook “Une Japonaise À Paris.” She shares the new recipe below; and when asked how thickly to slice the cake before serving, she says judiciously, “Well, it depends what else you eat.”
7 ounces softened butter, plus more to grease the tin 2 tablespoons sesame seeds 6.35 ounces brown sugar 3 eggs 6.35 ounces flour ⅓ teaspoon baking soda 2 tablespoons matcha ⅕ cup crème fraîche 2.8 ounces white chocolate, broken into small bits 5.3 ounces raspberries
1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees. Butter a loaf pan, and sprinkle the interior with sesame seeds.
2. Beat the 7 ounces of softened butter and brown sugar until the mixture whitens.
3. Incorporate the eggs one by one, beating well after each addition.
4. Mix the flour, baking soda and matcha in a separate bowl. Add half of it through a sieve to the egg mixture, and mix it with a spatula.
5. Incorporate the crème fraîche, then add the rest of the flour mixture. Mix carefully.
6. Incorporate the bits of white chocolate and the raspberries.
7. Pour the batter into the cake tin and bake for 50-55 minutes.
8. Let the cake cool for 10 minutes before removing it from the tin.

