Donald Trump keeps making promises that experts don't think he can possibly fulfill. It might seem that he has people fooled by his implausible claims, which include pledges to make Mexico pay for a border wall and to bring manufacturing jobs back to the United States. The psychologist David Dunning, for instance, has suggested that many voters are backing Mr. Trump because they lack the expertise to recognize his mistakes.
But in some news reports, his supporters sound more realistic about what Mr. Trump, the presumptive G.O.P. nominee, could accomplish as president. One voter told The Washington Post: “I mean, a physical wall? It's just such a strong vision and idea, but I just care about the border being secure.”
Similarly, NPR interviewed a retired steelworker who conceded that his industry's jobs were probably gone forever, but said of Mr. Trump, “If he accomplishes 10 percent of what he says he's going to do, then that's 10 percent more than anybody else is going to do.”
When it comes to policy, then, these Trump supporters may not be as naïve as people assume. Many don't take his promises literally — for instance, only 42 percent of Republicans believe Trump will succeed in making Mexico pay to build a wall. A number of these voters instead support him because he would move policy in their preferred direction, albeit not nearly as far as he suggests. (Some might not even want him to succeed in carrying out those proposals — for example, a March poll found that 37 percent of Trump supporters disagree with his plan to deport all illegal immigrants currently in the United States.)
These reactions are consistent with research by the political scientist Bernard Grofman, who considered what might happen when voters do not simply choose a candidate whose positions best match their own. If they discount those promises and instead gauge the likely effect of each candidate on the status quo, voters might in some cases choose a candidate whose preferred position is further from them.
Mr. Grofman describes a model of the situation we observe today — a right-leaning party he labels as R running as a non-incumbent party whose preferred position is far from the status quo. This party “would seek to move the status quo in the rightward direction,” he writes, but no “rational” voter would “believe that R would succeed in making such a radical shift in one election term; i.e., R's platform would be ‘discounted' in part.”
In this way, a voter who prefers a more modest move rightward might rationally prefer R even though R's position is further from the voter than a more moderate party on the left.
Mr. Grofman, whose article was published in 1985, suggests that this type of discounting may have helped Ronald Reagan among voters who did not believe he “would actually be able to carry out in full the drastic changes in policy in the conservative direction called for by his platform.”
The same dynamic may be unexpectedly boosting Mr. Trump. For voters who want a change from the status quo on issues like trade and immigration, supporting him may be perfectly rational — even when his promises may not be.

