The governor of West Virginia requested federal assistance on Saturday to help the state deal with the record flooding that has cut a wide path of destruction across a sector of the state and led to the deaths of at least 24 people.
In a statement, Gov. Earl Ray Tomblin said he had asked for help from the Federal Emergency Management Agency for Kanawha, Greenbrier and Nicholas counties, which have been swollen with floodwaters that have washed away houses, roads and vehicles and left thousands stranded since a band of thunderstorms struck on Thursday.
The sheriff's office in Kanawha County announced Saturday morning that three more deaths had been reported overnight. The bodies of one man and two women were found in flooded homes, and all of them were presumed to have drowned, officials said.
But on Saturday evening, the state's Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management said that the official death count stood at 24, up one from Friday. The department also said that nearly 30,000 homes were still without power.
More than 500 people were stranded and spent the night at the Elkview Crossings Mall, northeast of Charleston, because the roads leading there were among more than 60 washed out around the state. Governor Tomblin ordered emergency construction of a temporary road to reach the site.
In White Sulphur Springs, a house caught fire after it was ripped from its moorings, and it drifted like a floating torch down a creek.
One hundred homes were known to be badly damaged or destroyed, Mr. Tomblin said Friday after declaring a state of emergency in 44 of West Virginia's 55 counties. The victims included an 8-year-old boy and a 4-year-old boy, both carried off by fast-moving torrents where there would usually be shallow creeks.
“It's been a long 24 hours, and the next 24 hours may not be easier,” the governor said. “There will be an enormous amount of recovery work.”
In Virginia, Gov. Terry McAuliffe made an emergency declaration for Alleghany County and the city of Covington.
With roads impassable and rivers still near record highs in West Virginia, local officials said they did not know what the toll in death and destruction would ultimately be.
“I'm afraid that will go higher; some of the hardest-hit areas are areas that we can't get into,” said Kent Carper, the president of the Kanawha County Commission. “How many homes have been destroyed, nobody knows. We have not even started the property assessment.”
“I have seen bad flooding in West Virginia, but not like this,” he said. “It's devastation, just devastation.”
Most of West Virginia and western parts of Virginia received 1 to 3 inches of rain in a few hours on Thursday afternoon and evening, but the downpour was far more intense in some places. Parts of Greenbrier County, a sparsely populated area bordering Virginia, got 8 to 10 inches of rain, the National Weather Service reported.
The mountainous terrain funneled that water into rivers that quickly overflowed their banks. The Elk River at Queen Shoals crested Friday morning more than 14 feet above flood stage, the highest ever recorded. The Greenbrier River at Hilldale crested more than 19 feet above flood stage, the highest since the 19th century.
The Greenbrier Sporting Club had been planning to host its annual PGA Tour event starting July 7, but much of the famed golf course was underwater Thursday and Friday. On Saturday afternoon, the PGA announced that the event had been canceled.

