The bouncer at the door was wearing white latex gloves.
It wasn't a typical sight on a Thursday night at Julius', the gay bar in the West Village that recently received historic registry status by the state. At a place where a cursory ID check is usually as tight as security gets, the doorman was now stationed outside, checking bags and frisking customers before letting them through the doors.
Those who went out for a smoke were frisked a second time before being allowed back in, and then again every time they needed a nicotine fix. (After the fourth time, it started to get a little awkward for everyone.)
But it was four days after the horrific mass shooting during Latin Night at Pulse, the gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla. Everyone seemed to understand that things were a little different.
“You know, everyone's reeling from a tragedy,” said Tyler Waage, the 30-year-old Julius' bartender who, on this night, had been charged with guarding the bar's rear entrance. “The tone is definitely a bit more somber.”
Somber, maybe, but also galvanized. Almost everyone who spoke mentioned going to the emotional vigil three nights earlier at the Stonewall, a few blocks away. Now people were in a fighting spirit.
“We're in a different place than we were last year,” said Brian Landman, 38, who works in visual merchandising, when asked about the annual Gay Pride March on Sunday. (The march, in recent years, after a string of decisive victories for marriage equality, has taken the jubilant but somewhat desultory air of a pep rally for an undefeated football team.) “People are in more of a powerful, here we are, hear our roar, we-are-not-sitting-down kind of mood.”
Maybe that roar was coming later. For now, it seemed as if everyone just wanted everyone to be among friends, and everyone counted as a friend. It was a marked difference from the cliquishness and gamesmanship that sometimes sets the tone at gay bars.
The Mattachine party, named for the gay rights organization that held an early protest at Julius', was about to begin, and a younger, arty crowd was beginning to arrive, cramming themselves cheek by jowl with the older happy-hour crowd. It's a rare bar where young hunks in tank tops mix easily with elderly men in wheelchairs, and, on this night, it invoked a spirit of brotherhood that seemed more important than ever.
“It feels a little softer,” said Reid Rutledge, a 27-year-old graphic designer with a tiny diamond stud earring. “I think people realize they need to be more supportive.”
That didn't stop anyone from dancing. The line outside grew until it stretched halfway down the block, and the bar's owner, Helen Buford, arrived to help check people at the door.
The actor and director John Cameron Mitchell, Mattachine's co-founder and guiding spirit, bopped like a chilled-out elf in the makeshift D.J. booth as the dance area filled up. In a corner by the bar, the Gawker Media owner, Nick Denton, a week removed from his company's much-discussed bankruptcy filing, had a perpetually sheepish look. (“Why do people keep pointing at that guy?” someone asked.)
Outside, the sidewalk had become crowded with smokers and people taking a break from the music. Stephen Winter, a 44-year-old filmmaker with a cloud of curly gray hair, leaned against the exterior wall, interrupting his train of thought to greet friends as they paraded by. He was thinking about the past.
“Twenty years ago, when I was in my 20s, I was looking for my elders, and they weren't there,” he said. “They were either dead or ravaged by their grief and struggle. We were an orphan generation. We kind of had to raise ourselves.”
Mr. Winter considered his words for a moment.
“We never forgot that while we were dancing, or doing our thing, that there was literal blood that had been shed in order to get us there,” he said.
Not everyone was in the mood for such contemplation. A few minutes later, a little after 11:30, a disheveled gentleman was being dragged, drunkenly, down West 10th Street by his friends. “I want to go home!” he screamed at them. “You're not going to make a joke out of me! I want to go home!”
His carriage, clearly, was about to turn into a pumpkin.
The party went on without him. Julian Fleisher, a 44-year-old singer who came to New York during the height of the AIDS crisis, stood outside smoking with a few friends. He considered what the shootings in Orlando meant for the year's Gay Pride March, and for the future.
“This year, it's a political statement,” he said. “It's not just a bourgie celebration of, you know, my registry at — what's it? — Restoration Hardware. It's a real political act. We've got to be together, we've got to look out for each other and hold on to each other tight.”

