Just a half-hour before three people were stopped while trying to drive into New York City with what authorities said was a cache of weapons, one of them, an operator of a Pennsylvania gun range, appeared to sketch out his motivation for the trip.
That man, John Cramsey, 50, whose 20-year-old daughter died in February of a drug overdose, posted on Facebook that he was going to rescue a 16-year-old girl who was in trouble.
“I’m currently 11 miles outside of Brooklyn, New York, and going to a hotel to extract a 16-year-old girl who went up there to party with a few friends,” he wrote on the wall of Enough Is Enough, a group he administers to speak out against heroin abuse.
But Mr. Cramsey and the two others, Dean Smith, 53, and Kimberly Arendt, 29, did not make it to Brooklyn. They were stopped by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey police at the entrance to the Holland Tunnel in New Jersey at 7:40 a.m. Tuesday. They had a cracked windshield, the police said, and were arrested after the authorities said they found illegal guns and ammunition in the car, as well as a small amount of marijuana.
The group was not traveling inconspicuously.
Its vehicle, a black Dodge truck with red paint and neon green trim, was plastered with decals celebrating gun culture, including a large image of cross hairs, an allusion to the Second Amendment, and an advertisement for Higher Ground Tactical, the shooting range Mr. Cramsey operates in Emmaus, Pa.
Photographs of the truck drew wide attention as they circulated on social media.
On Wednesday, the three were arraigned before Judge Sheila A. Venable of Hudson County Superior Court in New Jersey and charged on several counts, including unlawful weapons possession, illegal transportation of a firearm, and possession of one pill of Valium and one pill of Xanax each. Mr. Cramsey and Ms. Arendt were also charged for possession of less than 50 grams of marijuana.
The three appeared in court via closed circuit television. Judge Venable declined their lawyers’ requests to lower bail from $75,000.
Mr. Cramsey’s lawyer, James Lisa, said that his client was legally able to transport the weapons because of his ownership of the gun range. Both Mr. Lisa and Mario Blanch, the lawyer representing Mr. Smith, who the police said drove the vehicle, argued that it had been unlawfully stopped and searched.
“It was not a big enough crack; it was what was on the car rather than the windshield,” Mr. Lisa said. “Police officers saw the decals and paintings basically expounding the Second Amendment.”
Thomas Zuppa Jr., an assistant prosecutor with the Hudson County prosecutor’s office, said that the weapons could have been used dangerously. “This is not just an ordinary gun case,” he said. “This conduct had the potential to bring danger.”
The Port Authority police said they recovered five pistols, an AR-15 assault rifle and a 12-gauge shotgun.
As news of the arrest circulated, numerous people took to Facebook to voice their support for Mr. Cramsey and his partners. Some said they would start a fund to raise bail money. One posted a video of a community meeting from March in which Mr. Cramsey spoke about his daughter’s death and described his son as a recovering addict.
“This is a disease,” Mr. Cramsey said, his voice trembling.
He initially “wanted vengeance” on the person who sold the drugs to his daughter, he said, and noted that he had a shirt, as well as a decal on his truck, that said, “Shoot your local heroin dealer.”
“I searched a little deeper and found out that he had a little 3-year-old girl. That 3-year-old girl two years ago lost her mom to heroin. So the thought of taking him out wouldn’t make me any better a man,” Mr. Cramsey said, adding, “I’ve changed my tune. I’m the inoculation to this disease.”
Mr. Cramsey’s daughter, Alexandria, died on Feb. 21 in an accidental death from heroin and fentanyl toxicity, according to the Lehigh County, Pa., coroner’s office.
A New York City Police Department spokesman would not comment on Mr. Cramsey’s contention in his Facebook post that he was going to save a 16-year-old in Brooklyn. The spokesman referred questions to the Port Authority police, who also declined to comment.
On Wednesday, reporters asked Mr. Lisa why there were so many weapons in his client’s car.
“No comment,” he replied.

