It’s a good thing for frog embryos to be able to hatch early. Suppose there’s a drought or some other environmental change that means the growing tadpoles would be better off in the water than in the egg.
The timing of hatching is subject to cues from the environment for many species, but even among these flexible hatchers the red-eyed treefrog stands out. It can escape its egg in seconds if threatened by a predator.
The frogs normally lay a mass of 40 or so eggs on a twig or leaf over a freshwater pond. If all is well, the eggs hatch at 6 or 7 days old and the tadpoles fall into the pond.
But if the eggs are attacked by a snake or a wasp during the last couple of days of development, the embryos can launch early. They wriggle out and drop to the water in less than a minute, sometimes in less than 10 seconds.
Karen M. Warkentin, a biologist at Boston University who studies the frogs, said a snake can gobble up a bunch of eggs at once, but wasps can also do severe damage over a couple of days, carrying frog embryos back to a nest to feed their young.
“Think bald eagles and salmon, but really small,” she said.
The attack, even of a wasp, causes enough movement to signal danger to the embryos. If they are in the last third of their development, they can survive on their own, so they enter the world early, and quickly.
Dr. Warkentin and Kristina L. Cohen, a Ph.D. student in Dr. Warkentin’s lab, and Marc. A. Seid, a biologist at the University of Scranton, conducted a number of tests on embryos to determine how they manage early hatching. They published their results in The Journal of Experimental Biology.
The researchers collected eggs in Panama, where Dr. Warkentin is affiliated with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.
Once they had them, they poked the eggs to signal danger and recorded the actions of the embryos. They also used electron microscopy to search for hatching glands, common on frogs, that emit enzymes to digest the egg membrane.
They found that first, a blister forms on the egg membrane, where the enzymes are digesting it. Once the membrane is breached the tadpoles thrash their way through the hole.
Hatching glands are concentrated on the snout of the embryo, instead of on top of the head or along the back, where the glands are found in other frogs. The enzymes from those glands usually soften up the whole membrane over an extended period of time.
The red-eyed treefrog embryos, by contrast, sent out a concentrated and directed burst of the enzymes from the snout, making a hole to wriggle through.
Dr. Warkentin said she didn’t know of other frogs with that speed of hatching, and that it was extraordinary to think that an embryo could have this defensive ability.
“It can save its own life,” she said.

