Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. My colleagues at The Times's Race/Related newsletter, which is devoted to coverage of and conversations about race, have started a cool new reporting project on how food shapes our identity. They're asking readers just like you what you'll be cooking, eating or drinking this summer that speaks to race, family and identity in advance of publishing some of the stories, photographs of family gatherings and food (and perhaps some of your recipes, too!) in a subsequent edition of the newsletter.
So whether your summer cooking tradition is embutido from the Philippines, Los Angeles-style carne asada, or a block of Jarlsberg, Triscuits and a cold bottle of vodka from the White Bridge liquor shop in Darien, Conn., please take part in their survey. It will be fascinating to see what everyone's cooking, and how, and why.
But perhaps you want to try cooking something new this weekend? I've got an ace recipe up on Cooking this week, for the grilled chicken parm served at the Speedy Romeo restaurants in Brooklyn and on the Lower East Side. Justin Bazdarich, the chef and an owner, talked me through the technique of making it for a column in The Times Magazine. I hope you'll read that, too.
Or maybe you could assay Julia Moskin's recipe for porchetta, which she just brought home from Umbria. It's designed for cooking on a grill, but you could knock it down in an oven if a grill's unavailable to you. Serve it with bread or sage-scented roast potatoes.
After reading Ligaya Mishan's sweet review of the Crabby Shack, a seafood emporium in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, all you may want to do is eat crab. I like the Brooklyn tough guy Tony Durazzo's recipe for spaghetti and crabs on a summer evening. Or Matt Lee and Ted Lee's adaptation of the recipe for chili crab that Zakary Pelaccio used to serve at Fatty Crab in New York.
Hot crab and oyster dip from Melissa Clark? Steamed blue crabs? If you can find some peelers, as the kids down in The City That Reads call soft-shell crabs, try Melissa's recipe for soft-shell crab toast.
Then, for dessert, you may try Emily Weinstein's recipe for the simplest strawberry tart (or my even easier recipe for poundcake and strawberries, which truthfully you could make with an Entenmann's loaf and still be happy). Or you could make whoopie pies!
That should get you started, anyway. Other recipes to cook this weekend can be found on Cooking, as always. Please save the ones you like to your recipe box and rate them when you're done cooking. Did you successfully substitute lamb for beef, anchovies for soy sauce, watercress for sorrel? Leave a note on the recipe so that others may benefit from your adventurousness.
And if you run into problems, either with our technology or with something we've written, please ask for help. We're at cookingcare@nytimes.com. As for me, I'm a digital immigrant with a love of his country. Reach me on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest, or send a note to foodeditor@nytimes.com.
Now, let's watch Andre Previn and Dinah Shore sing “Begin the Beguine” and “April in Paris” together (and at the same time!) in 1959. Have you seen the beguiling trailer for “Swallows and Amazons” yet? Or the somewhat more terrifying one for “The Shallows”? Absolutely, let us bow our heads for Ralph Stanley, the king of mountain music, who died yesterday at 89. Here he is singing “O Death.”

