Times Insider shares historic insights from The New York Times. In this piece, David W. Dunlap, a Metro reporter, looks back at a typographical quandary introduced by Dwight D. Eisenhower's presidential campaign.
Picture a presidential campaign logotype.
You may be thinking Hillary Clinton's arrow-point “H” or Jeb Bush's “Jeb!”
The word “Eisenhower” in Latin Extra Condensed has probably not popped into your mind.
But at The Times, it was a true campaign logotype.
In the language of the composing room, a logotype is not a graphic trademark but a single piece of type containing a whole word. The advantage of such a piece is that spacing between letters, even the letter forms themselves, can be subtly modified.
Copy editors at The Times were bedeviled in 1952 by the emergence of Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower as the Republican presidential candidate. His name was too long to fit comfortably in a one-column headline. There typically wasn't room left over for a verb. And there was no way that the proper New York Times would ever call the man “Ike” in its news pages.
So we turned for help to the Intertype Company, the manufacturers of much of the equipment in our fourth-floor composing room at 229 West 43rd Street, including the line-casting machines known generically as Linotypes.
Their typographers drew up a solid logotype in which the letters were ever so slightly condensed. (The difference is most noticeable in the “W,” though it can be seen pretty clearly in the “S.”) This logotype could be inserted alongside conventionally set type to provide the breathing room needed for headlines like, “Eisenhower Visits Cardinal's Home; Will Speak Today.”
Times Insider can't take credit for uncovering this delightful bit of typographical history. It was prompted by an inquiry from Adrienne LaFrance of The Atlantic, who was researching “The Legend of Eisenhower's Skinny ‘S.' ”
But we can broaden this condensed-a-bit story by noting that Mr. Eisenhower's was not the last name made into a logotype.
Allan M. Siegal, a retired assistant managing editor of The Times and its longtime typographical maven, said: “Later on, the same treatment was accorded to ‘Rockefeller,' ‘Hammarskjold,' ‘Westchester' and ‘Khrushchev.' They were made in both 24-point and 30-point Latin Extra Condensed.”
Photocomposition put an end to it all: Linotypes, Intertypes and logotypes.

