LOS ANGELES — Joshua Malina and Hrishikesh Hirway, the co-hosts of the podcast “The West Wing Weekly,” were here in the backyard studio of Mr. Hirway's home on a recent afternoon, preparing to tape an interview with Senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania. Mr. Casey was going to call in four minutes, now three, but Mr. Hirway's phone wasn't working. “That's not good,” he said, as he scrambled to find a fix. “Just a senator,” Mr. Malina said wryly. “It's just a U.S. senator.”
“The West Wing Weekly” is not your typical pop-culture podcast. Unlike others of its ilk, the show, which began last March, features a co-host who was actually a participant in the piece of pop culture being discussed. Mr. Malina played the White House deputy communications director Will Bailey on the series and stars on “Scandal,” another hit series set in Washington.
“There are other TV recap shows, but none of them have a ringer, a man on the inside, someone who actually knows the inner workings of the show,” Mr. Hirway said.
Mr. Hirway is a singer, composer and host of the podcast “Song Exploder,” which explores the origin story of a single song (Iggy Pop's “American Valhalla,” Wilco's “Magnetized”) with its creator. “Hrishi's a lot younger and cooler than I,” Mr. Malina said.
The two hosts have set an ambitious goal for themselves: discuss all 154 episodes of the critically acclaimed, Emmy Award-winning series. The podcast has already gotten over 2.5 million downloads; listeners include fans who watched the series during its 1999 to 2006 run, as well as those who downloaded or streamed it later.
At one episode per week, Mr. Malina and Mr. Hirway will finish up sometime around 2019, assuming they don't include too many special episodes — or flame out.
And then there are the guests. In addition to former cast members, the podcast has hosted Eli Attie, who was the chief speechwriter for former Vice President Al Gore, and Ronald Klain, a former chief of staff to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “I was geeking out about talking to Ron Klain, and all of that was because of ‘The West Wing,'” Mr. Hirway said.
The pair connected in 2001 when Mr. Hirway emailed Mr. Malina, a fellow Yalie, out of the blue, asking for advice about the industry. After a TV project they had been working on for two years fell through, Mr. Hirway wanted to do something more D.I.Y. Why not a podcast about “The West Wing”? It was his favorite show, his friend had been on it, and he knew about podcasting thanks to “Song Exploder.”
Mr. Malina wasn't so sure. “I didn't feel qualified,” he said. Unlike Mr. Hirway, who had watched many “West Wing” episodes up to a dozen times, Mr. Malina hadn't even seen some that he had been on. “People would come up to me and they'd mention some moment from an episode, and it would have no meaning to me,” he said.
But then he rewatched the pilot, and was reminded of just why the show had won more than two dozen Emmys, a record-setting nine in its first season. After securing a blessing from the show's creator and his longtime friend Aaron Sorkin — “I certainly wouldn't want to launch into an endeavor like this, then find out that he was pissed at me,” Mr. Malina said — the two collaborators went about planning shows and booking guests.
During his episode, Richard Schiff, who played the White House communications director Toby Ziegler, described the trauma of forgetting to acknowledge his wife and kids during his 2000 Emmy acceptance speech, and got choked up recalling the filming of “In Excelsis Deo,” a celebrated episode about a homeless veteran who freezes to death on the National Mall. “I'd expected it to be glib and funny, which is what typically happens when you hang out with Josh,” Mr. Schiff said. “What surprised me about him was that he was so genuinely curious about the show.”
Future guests include Mr. Sorkin (“I'd do anything Josh Malina asked me to do,” he said in an email interview), the actress Marlee Matlin, the former White House press secretary Dee Dee Myers, and the creator of “Hamilton,” Lin-Manuel Miranda, a longtime “Wingnut” and one of the first fans who asked to be on.
Although Mr. Malina admits that he began the “Weekly” unsure if audiences would tune in, the response was immediate. Fans of the series regularly chime in on the podcast's comments section, praising the commentary, themed shows, and guests — as well as picking spirited fights with one another (and, on occasion, with Mr. Malina) over plot points and favorite characters. “Even though I jokingly call it a book club of two, people weigh in,” Mr. Malina said.
Alumni of the show have been equally positive. “I started sobbing about five minutes in and didn't stop until about five minutes after it was over,” said Mr. Sorkin, speaking about Mr. Schiff's episode.
Still, Mr. Malina, who is a known prankster, has taken his fair share of ribbing. During a recent “West Wing” reunion at the ATX Television Festival in Austin, former castmates questioned his warmth, humanity and commitment to United States veterans. (The podcast had recently hosted the actress Melissa Fitzgerald, who after “West Wing” became the senior director of the nonprofit Justice for Vets.)
“Once Melissa Fitzgerald, arguably the kindest person on Earth, took a shot at me for not liking vets, I knew I was in trouble,” he said.
Perhaps most heartening to the hosts are the admittedly small percentage of people who came to the podcast because of their other projects, and discover “West Wing” as a result. “That's my favorite part,” Mr. Malina said, “because I know what a treat they're in for.”

