Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.
1. Good morning from an Independent Britain!
Today, the sun is shining and I am bursting with pride that so many decent, ordinary British people refused to be cowed by the bullying tactics and politics of the bloated globalists and the liberal elitists.
The “remain” zealots’ main “weapon of fear” was the economy.
What they failed to recognize is the economy means not a jot to people who have very little, i.e. our almost decimated fishing industry, the steel workers, miners and others living in virtual wastelands.
Then to openly encourage mass immigration, particularly into these forgotten areas, was the final straw!
— Jill Parkinson in England, reacting to Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. Her comment was recommended by more than 280 Times readers.
2. I was born in 1960, 15 years after the end of World War II.
Unlike my parents, I never witnessed a war in which tens of millions of people died, and in which the major nations of the world fought against each other.
What became the E.U. is a major reason for this. I remember crying with joy in 1989 when the Berlin wall came down.
But now I look at my 16-year-old son, and wonder if he will experience more than a half century of such peace.
And I am angry with David Cameron for inadvertently fostering the hate that was such a prominent part of the campaign and bodes so badly for the future.
Racism was always key to the British feelings of superiority that lay behind this campaign, just as it is to the American equivalent championed by Trump.
And the kind of bullying both campaigns fosters is a major threat to world peace.
— Kate in Dublin
3. I voted passionately for a leave vote and I am jubilant at the result because I believe Britain has more potential to grow outside the bureaucracy of the failed E.U. project.
I love Europe and I look forward to negotiating new fresh agreements that fit our interests and aspirations.
I also immediately felt stronger and safer knowing that democracy and power have been restored to my elected govt.
— Akila Deram in London, writing on The Times’s Facebook Page.
4. I was born in 1991. I don’t remember a time when I was something other than European.
It’s the ability of being at home in Paris as well as Berlin and Madrid, it is the feeling of being part of something greater than yourself.
And this, this feels like a breakup: the bitterness, the misunderstandings, the whys, the feeling of being unwelcomed, unwanted, unsafe.
It is both personal and emotional.
England has lost so much more than just money and trade with this vote. What they failed to understand is that history does not go back if you stomp your feet and blame someone else.
The world Britain yearns for does not exist anymore, and instead of facing reality and going forward they’re trying to go back. Great Britain is not so great anymore.
— Cecilia Ascoli in Italy, writing on The Times’s Facebook page.
5. Obama’s executive amnesty grab was a big stretch, even for the master of the executive order.
Illegal is illegal, and the rule of law prevails.
When you break the law by entering the United States illegally, you do not deserve to be rewarded with a free pass to stay here, much less a straight line path to citizenship.
My grandparents came here from Russia. They went through Ellis Island, and had American sponsor relatives who guaranteed their food and shelter.
There was no government handout for them. And they became citizens. I am proud of them.
— Paul in White Plains, reacting to the Supreme Court ruling that effectively blocked President Obama’s immigration plan.
This comment received more than 830 reader recommendations.
6. Over a hundred years ago, one of my grandmothers was an “anchor baby” in today’s slang. Her mother never naturalized.
Her father naturalized just in time to get one of the first Social Security numbers and its benefits. Her parents (my great grandparents) spent time in Canada (a non-quota nation) before entering the U.S.
From what I can tell, they committed an illegal act then and exploited a loophole later.
How did they get away with it? They were white. Very white. Translucent white. And being from England, they were English speaking.
Read the history of U.S. immigration laws sometime. They’re slapdash, arbitrary, and capricious products of racism and jingoism.
Are you really sure that you’re here legitimately? Are you absolutely certain that the system your family came in under was fair? Are you utterly convinced that the laws in place today are in the country’s best interests?
I’m not.
— SEM in Massachussetts.
7. Decades from now, the people will wonder how did the Supreme Court allow for discrimination based on the color of one’s skin. Because that is exactly what this is.
It is as noxious as the old “separate but equal” laws the Supreme Court upheld 100 years ago. This is truly shameful.
— Vizitei Yuri in Columbia, Mo., reacting to the Supreme Court’s ruling upholding affirmative action at the University of Texas at Austin.
This comment received more than 300 reader recommendations and 30 replies.
8. As a graduate of U.T. Austin, I applaud the Supreme Court’s decision.
Like Ms. Fisher, I was a sheltered little white girl who grew up around other sheltered white kids. My experiences with the racially, politically and culturally diverse students at U.T. changed my life for the better.
I know I would not be as successful as I am today had U.T. not provided me the chance to meet and study with professors and students from all over the world. I owe U.T.’s diverse community a huge debt.
— TexasTabby in Dallas.
9. Know what my “mom hair” looks like?
It looks like the hair of a woman who gets up at five, who works hard all day, who goes to bed and who *might* remember to remove her ponytail holder.
Enough already. How about lifting each other up for once?
— Laura Riker, reacting on The Times’s Facebook page to an article about “mom hair,” which was portrayed as “the longer-in-back, slightly–shorter-in-front bob that should read sleek but is inescapably frumpy.”
Her comment received more than 2,400 likes.
10. Having lived in Cleveland now for just over half my life, after having grown up in a city that experienced professional sports championships, it may surprise others to know that these championships make a difference in how a city views itself.
The “chip” on the shoulders of Clevelanders is real — and the odd satisfaction you feel when your team wins a championship, more so.
For those who don’t care about sports, there is a meaning here that goes beyond the highly paid athletes and the commercial elements of these games.
And that’s what we saw last night on the floor at the end of the game and in the streets of Cleveland — legitimate or not, it is something that many, many people will remember for as long as they live.
— X in the United States, reacting to the Cleveland Cavaliers’ winning the N.B.A. championship — the first major sports title for the city since 1964.

