In his latest meant-to-shock music video, Kanye West puts himself and his wife, Kim Kardashian West, in a special breed of rarefied company. Splayed out on a huge bed, the couple — or realistic figures in their likenesses — are surrounded by nude depictions of family (Caitlyn Jenner), former flames (Ray J, Amber Rose), friends and colleagues (Rihanna, Chris Brown, Anna Wintour) and some of this era’s most polarizing men (Donald J. Trump, George W. Bush, Bill Cosby).
And then there is Taylor Swift.
The song is “Famous,” from Mr. West’s recent album, “The Life of Pablo.” On the track, which has been fuel for months of tabloid chatter and social media speculation, he raps about his complicated history with Ms. Swift — “I feel like me and Taylor might still have sex” — adding that he had made her famous. (The rapper claimed after the song’s release that Ms. Swift had approved it, which she denied, even sending a rebuke his way in her Grammy speech this year for winning Album of the Year.)
The “Famous” video, a grainy and voyeuristic 10-minute “comment on fame,” in Mr. West’s own words, premiered on Friday night at the Forum in Los Angeles and on a simultaneous livestream hosted by Tidal, the music service. The video will be available exclusively on the streaming service for one week, the company said.
Shot like a creepy home video, the visuals feature an uncomfortably close camera panning across the sleeping celebrities in night vision, lingering over their instantly recognizable faces and uncovered bodies. The tableau recalls a painting, “Sleep,” by the American artist Vincent Desiderio. In an interview with Vanity Fair, Mr. West also cited the artist Matthew Barney as an influence.
The history between many of those portrayed is complicated, sordid and the stuff of TMZ — a sex tape for Ms. Kardashian West and Ray J, for example, and the well-known history of abuse in the case of Rihanna and Mr. Brown. (Mr. Brown responded to the video, mostly in emoji, on Instagram, adding that Mr. West is “talented, but crazy.”)
But it is the presence of Ms. Swift, directly next to Mr. West in bed, that seems to be the most button-pushing. Months after the back-and-forth over the song’s content, Ms. Kardashian West revisited the feud in a recent GQ interview. “She totally approved that,” she said of Ms. Swift, referring to the line in the song. “She totally knew that that was coming out.” Mr. West even has his phone call with Ms. Swift on video, she added.
A representative for Ms. Swift replied, in part, “Kanye West never played the song for Taylor Swift. Taylor heard it for the first time when everyone else did and was humiliated.” (Representatives for the singer did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the music video, and whether or not she had approved the use of her likeness.)
For his part, Mr. West, forever needling his rivals and eager to get the last word, expressed only gratitude. The video ends with a special thanks for those represented — just “for being famous.”

