SESTO FIORENTINO, Italy — Convento Il Chiostro, a monastery in the 17th century and now a rambling vacation home, sits on a secluded Tuscan hillside where deer and wild boar still roam.
The area has barely changed since Florentine monks lived there, and yet the home is only about a 40-minute drive from the bustle of Florence.
Nicola Gandini, a retired publisher who once trained as an architect, and his wife, Giovanna, bought the rundown monastery 26 years ago and spent four years renovating it.
“I was fascinated by the building’s originality, location and adaptability,” Mr. Gandini said.
The building, with an area of 2,300 square meters, or 24,750 square feet, is architecturally distinctive. Step into the living room, which was once the formal entrance hall and meeting room, and you are greeted by a soaring nine- meter-high ceiling, more reminiscent of the TV series “Game of Thrones” than a holiday villa. Terracotta floors create a sense of warmth, while the walls are decorated with frescoes from Italy’s Renaissance heyday. “Everything is original, even the doors,” Mr. Gandini said.
Vast wooden doors open onto a terrace and lawn with stunning views. In the distance is the small town of Sesto Fiorentino, which sits on a wide plain. Florence is just out of view.
Clearly the monks lived well. A huge fireplace, big enough to roast a wild boar (if not two), dominates the room. “Every room has a fireplace and we use them a lot in the winter,” Mr. Gandini said.
The ecclesiastical history of the building is evident in its design. Il Chiostro is Italian for the cloister, and a side door opens onto a three-sided cloister built around an open courtyard with a small hedge maze and a cooling fountain. The master bedroom and a billiard room, as well as a small fresco-covered chapel, all overlook this peaceful feature.
At the opposite end of the main, garden entrance, the grand room opens into the interior of the house. A long corridor that once would have led to spartan sleeping quarters now leads to two cozy wood-paneled studies, a further roomy bedroom and an elegant “everyday” sitting room.
The couple are eager to find a buyer. In March of this year, the house went to auction as a distress sale for 6.5 million euros, or $5.8 million, at the current exchange rate. As it did not sell, it will, under the Italian system, be resubmitted for auction in the fall. This time it will be priced 25 percent less, or €4.9 million, with a reserve of up to 25 percent below the new asking price.
“More often than not, nobody bids on the first round, because they know it will come back at a lower price,” said Rupert Fawcett, partner with Knight Frank, the international estate agency.
This process will continue until the former monastery is sold, unless a private buyer can be found first. The home is currently being marketed out of auction for €4 million.
Much of the interest so far has come from architects, says Jeremy Onslow-Macaulay, managing director of Casa & Country, a real estate agency based in Tuscany and with offices in London.
“It can easily be divided into four apartments,” he said.
One flight up are two roomy self-contained apartments; the Gandinis’ son lives in one of them. The south wing, currently unrestored, could make another self-contained home.
The basement was clearly the bustling center of the monastery. It contains the original kitchen, with workmanlike stone sinks and a large bread oven. Adjacent is a spacious refectory-like service area, which Mr. Gandini has occasionally hired out as an event space for weddings.
Much of Il Chiostro’s charm derives from its idyllic setting. The home sits on nine and a half hectares, or 23 acres, which include a vegetable garden (in its original design) as well as woods, and a meadow where, Mr. Gandini suggests, a sheltered swimming pool could be added. The property has its own independent water supply. There are also flourishing olive groves.
Although Florence’s international airport is only about half an hour’s drive away, the immediate area is tranquil. The only neighbors are a short stroll away up an unpaved road to a quaint hamlet, as untouched now as it was four centuries ago.

