The British artist Aubrey Beardsley knew early on that his life would be short. He was only 7 when, in 1879, he learned that he had tuberculosis.
He started drawing around the time his illness was detected. By age 20, he had made inroads in the worlds of art and literature and befriended Oscar Wilde. In 1898, the year he died, Beardsley wrote to a friend that he regretted not being able to finish the “splendid things” he had planned.
For the last two decades, Linda Gertner Zatlin, a professor of English at Morehouse College in Atlanta, has been tracking down his artworks, including doodles. Her new boxed two-volume set, “Aubrey Beardsley: A Catalogue Raisonné” (Yale University Press), analyzes around 1,200 drawings, paintings, prints and posters. Although Beardsley is best known for portraying sexually aroused men and wraithlike female temptresses, he was far more versatile than is generally assumed, Dr. Zatlin said. “The variety is massive,” she said.
Her catalog corrects errors that crept into past biographies; even Beardsley’s mother, Ellen, made mistakes when interviewed about his life and creative process. Few of his letters reflecting on his work have been found. “He is so opaque,” Dr. Zatlin said.
The artist’s father, Vincent, held a clerical job at a London brewery, and his mother worked as a governess and gave French and piano lessons. The family moved “from lodging house to lodging house,” Dr. Zatlin writes.
Soon after Beardsley’s diagnosis, he was sent to boarding school. He sketched bonneted children in bucolic settings on place cards as gifts for friends. He illustrated programs for school theater productions and for plays that he and his sister, Mabel, performed for their parents. In the 1920s, his mother recalled that her children’s “little entertainments” brightened their evenings.
Beardsley studied art after secondary school and worked as a clerk for surveyors and insurance agents. Tubercular hemorrhages sidelined him for months at a time. He described himself as having “a vile constitution, a sallow face and sunken eyes, long red hair, a shuffling gait and a stoop.”
He did freelance illustrations for magazines, Wilde’s writings, books about Arthurian legends, Greek dramas and 18th-century witticisms. Dr. He designed advertisements for plays and even sewing machines, and painted and sketched portraits. He sometimes depicted hermaphrodites and amputees; an editor observed in 1895 that Beardsley’s “ruling passion is a desire to astonish the public with the unexpected.”
He medicated himself with mercury and antimony and managed to travel; he died on the French Riviera with his mother and sister by his side.
Dr. Zatlin said that Beardsley’s constant drawing helped distract him from his health. His attitude, she said, was along the lines of “if I think about it, I’m going to die faster.” In 1936, the critic J. Lewis May recalled him as “composed of atoms moving with such intense rapidity as to create the illusion of absolute tranquillity.”
Dr. Zatlin has visited Beardsley’s homes and workplaces, and institutions that own his drawings, like the British Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. She studied the holdings of private collectors like Mark Samuels Lasner, and interviewed descendants of people who knew him, including Wilde’s grandson, Merlin Holland. She had help decoding the Victorian symbolism of flowers and foliage in his drawings: Grapevines signified intoxication, waterlilies represented purity of heart, and sunflowers conveyed adoration.
Around 400 of Beardsley’s original artworks are missing but are mentioned in documents or are known from reproductions, Dr. Zatlin said. His notebooks, which his sister preserved, have apparently vanished. One batch of drawings was destroyed in a fire in 1929. So far, 118 of his letters have turned up. Dr. Zatlin is the co-editor, with the literary historian Jane Desmarais, of a compilation of the letters that is to be published in a few years.
Evidence has surfaced that earlier scholars of Beardsley’s work were not scrupulous about checking facts; one scholar, when asked to verify a detail, is said to have told a colleague, “Put it in, nobody will know any better or query it.” Dr. Zatlin has also identified many fakes. At least one of his friends produced and sold forgeries even while Beardsley was alive.
The book’s provenance listings make it possible to trace auction sale prices. In 2012 at Bonhams in London, Princeton University Library spent about $24,000 on a copy of a Stéphane Mallarmé poem with Beardsley’s doodles in the margins. And Dr. Zatlin documents her own purchases, including a drawing of a woman playing piano outdoors by a pond ($34,500 in 2004 at Neal Auction Company in New Orleans); a portrait of robed chorus singers in a London theater production (about $5,000 at Ketterer Kunst auction house in Munich in 2006); and a red chalk portrait of the actress Gabrielle Réjane ($55,000 at Christie’s in London in 2015).
Part of the satisfaction in finishing the book, Dr. Zatlin said, is that it creates a kind of “permanent home” for Beardsley, who spent so much of his life moving between rented lodgings.

