Across New York on Tuesday night, incumbents in the state’s congressional primaries appeared to be on track to keep their seats, while the aftereffects of the presidential primary season rippled through other contests, setting up unpredictable clashes over the balance of power in the House of Representatives in the fall.
Breezing past their challengers: Representative Gregory W. Meeks, of the Fifth District, which covers a large chunk of Queens and parts of Nassau County; Representative Nydia M. Velázquez, of the Seventh, which includes parts of northern Brooklyn and Queens; Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, of the 10th, which runs down the West Side of Manhattan and into southern Brooklyn; Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, of the 12th, which straddles the East River to cover eastern Manhattan, waterfront Queens and northern Brooklyn; and Representative José E. Serrano, of the 15th, in the Bronx.
All five, who are Democrats, will have an even easier time of it in the general election, given that their districts are deep blue.
But in other cases, Tuesday’s matchups were but a prelude to November’s, in which every seat not safely in partisan territory will be buffeted by the uncertain effects of having Donald J. Trump at the top of the Republican ticket.
Democrats are hoping that an aversion to Mr. Trump will help them pick up more seats in the Republican-controlled House of Representatives than they otherwise would in the fall, though the presumptive Republican presidential nominee is popular in parts of upstate New York and Long Island.
The ramifications of Trump’s candidacy will be tested in districts like the First, on Long Island, where the Republican incumbent, Lee Zeldin, is a stout Trump supporter. Two Democrats — Anna Throne-Holst, a former Southampton town supervisor, and Dave Calone, a venture capitalist and a former federal prosecutor — were battling for the chance to challenge him, with Ms. Throne-Holst holding on to a very slim lead around 11 p.m. on Tuesday.
One high-profile contest centered on the 19th District, in the Hudson Valley, where Zephyr Teachout, a law professor who made her political name with an unexpectedly rugged challenge to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo in the 2014 primary, blew past Will Yandik, an environmentalist and farmer, in the Democratic primary. Ms. Teachout, who was backed by Senator Bernie Sanders, is running to replace Representative Chris Gibson, a Republican who had considered running for governor in 2018 but decided instead to retire from politics.
The Republican results in the 19th on Tuesday night began as more of a muddle, in large part because of an unexplained error on the ballots sent to more than 50 Columbia County polling sites.
Only two candidates were running — John Faso, a former state assemblyman who also made an unsuccessful bid for the governor’s office, and Andrew Heaney, a businessman. But a third candidate, Bob Bishop, was mistakenly included on the ballot, even though he dropped out several weeks ago.
With optical scanning machines prepared for only two candidates, votes for Mr. Faso, who was listed third, were coming up as blanks. Though the county Board of Elections had distributed corrected ballots by midafternoon Tuesday, any ballots cast before then had to be counted by hand, said Greg Fingar, the chairman of the county Republicans.
It made little, if any, difference: Mr. Faso, the favorite going in, was declared the winner.
In the 13th District, nine candidates were vying to replace Representative Charles B. Rangel, with Adriano D. Espaillat and Keith L. T. Wright considered the front-runners.
In Long Island’s Third District, Tom Suozzi, a former Nassau County executive, defeated four other Democrats for the nomination to replace Representative Steve Israel, a former Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman, who is leaving Congress after 16 years.
Mr. Suozzi will face State Senator Jack M. Martins, a Republican, in the fall.
Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, a Democrat, will try to hold his seat in the northern suburbs of Westchester and the lower Hudson Valley against Phil Oliva, an adviser to Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, who won the Republican primary over Kenneth Del Vecchio, a filmmaker and Trump supporter.
The Democratic primary in the 24th District, which includes Syracuse, was seen as a test for the clout of Mr. Sanders, who had endorsed Eric Kingson, a Social Security expert. Mr. Kingson lost to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee-backed Colleen Deacon, a former aide to Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, who will go on to challenge Representative John Katko, the Republican incumbent.
Another Republican incumbent in central New York, Representative Richard Hanna of the 22nd District, is retiring. The Republican nominee to replace him will be Claudia Tenney, a state assemblywoman, who defeated George K. Phillips, who has twice unsuccessfully run for the seat, and Steven M. Wells, a businessman, on Tuesday night.
The Democratic candidate, Kim Myers, a businesswoman from Binghamton, was unopposed.

