And with the third pick, the N.B.A. draft could officially begin.
That was the sense Thursday night at Barclays Center, after the first two selections went the way they had been projected to for weeks, if not longer: Ben Simmons, the multitalented forward from Louisiana State, went No. 1 to the Philadelphia 76ers, trailed shortly thereafter by Brandon Ingram, whom the Los Angeles Lakers took at No. 2.
With most N.B.A. fans — other than those in Philadelphia and Los Angeles — not focused on the top two picks, the real drama arrived at No. 3.
The Boston Celtics, who owned eight picks at the start of the night, including three in the first round, seemed eager to unload the rights to whomever came after Simmons and Ingram — a diverse but purportedly limited pool of prospects that analysts did not exactly rave about.
As the minutes ticked down, a heavy sense of anticipation began to build. Rumors buzzed: Would the Celtics manage to trade the pick in time?
When the television broadcast cut to a commercial break, however, the camera crew scrambled into position in front of Jaylen Brown, a 6-foot-7 forward from California. Finally, Commissioner Adam Silver emerged to confirm that Brown, wearing a wine red suit and a relieved expression, would be Boston's first pick of the night.
“I had no idea,” Brown said. “I promise you, I had no idea. I was actually sweating bullets when the final seconds came in.”
Trades had been heavily rumored all week, but blockbusters did not shake up the top of the draft. Phoenix selected the 18-year-old, 7-foot-1 Croatian Dragan Bender with the No. 4 pick, the same draft spot from which Kristaps Porzingis, a Latvian, went to the Knicks a year ago.
With the No. 5 pick, Minnesota went with Kris Dunn, the point guard from Providence. The Oklahoma shooting guard Buddy Hield (New Orleans) and the Kentucky freshman point guard Jamal Murray (Denver) followed at Nos. 6 and 7.
The first trade arrived when the Sacramento Kings swapped the rights to Marquese Chriss, the Washington power forward whom they selected eighth, to the Suns for the No. 13 pick, Georgios Papagiannis of Greece, and the 28th pick, the Kentucky freshman center Skal Labissiere.
The biggest move of the night was a deal that sent the Oklahoma City Thunder's Serge Ibaka to the Orlando Magic for Victor Oladipo, Ersan Ilyasova and the rights to the No. 11 pick, Domantas Sabonis, a 6-11 power forward from Gonzaga.
The flurry of activity toward the middle of the first round was not surprising. It is generally believed that some players selected in the second round could emerge as serviceable role players down the road. The depth and quality of the first round, however, were a little harder to gauge.
Not surprisingly, in the weeks and days and hours before the draft, a pattern of activity began to emerge among the teams holding the spots after No. 2: It appeared they wanted to trade down in, or perhaps out of, the first round in exchange for somebody who could assist them right away.
The Sixers, with their highest pick since selecting Allen Iverson first over all in 1996, were not entertaining any trade offers. Almost as soon as Philadelphia won the lottery, it seemed as though a union with Simmons was a foregone conclusion. Philadelphia's coach, Brett Brown, had even coached Simmons's father, David, while with the Melbourne Tigers in an Australian basketball league in 1989.
Simmons, 19, became the third Melbourne native to be chosen with the No. 1 pick, joining Andrew Bogut (2005) and Kyrie Irving (2011), who was born in Australia but moved to New Jersey at the age of 2.
Some analysts say Simmons could be the best to emerge from the country. He averaged 19.2 points, 11.8 rebounds and 4.8 assists in his one season at Louisiana State — a nightly display of productivity and versatility that was comparable to another former No. 1 pick: LeBron James. In fact, Simmons has been working out in Cleveland to soak up time with James, whom he considers a mentor.
“It honestly feels like all this pressure just has hopped off me,” Simmons said. “Now I can relax, but now I know where I'm going to be. More importantly, I know where I'm headed and know I can really start working on what I need to work on for the team.”
Simmons was one of a record 14 internationally born players selected in the first round. Most of these players had not been officially invited to the players' designated area. When their names were called they emerged from the stands, walking past projected lottery picks still waiting.
Among them was Labissiere, who waited patiently along with Washington's Dejounte Murray, whom the San Antonio Spurs selected 29th. Michigan State's Deyonta Davis wound up leaving the floor before the Celtics made him the first pick of the second round. In a proposed trade, the Celtics dealt Davis, the freshman power forward, to the Memphis Grizzlies.
Local fans of the New York basketball franchises could sympathize. Neither the Knicks nor the Nets owned a first-round pick at the start of the night.

