The Yankees find themselves at a precarious moment, facing a crossroads just up ahead. With a short winning streak — just a tick above mediocre — they could feel like contenders. With a long patch of losing, they could be forced to confront a harsh new reality.
Their victory on Wednesday — a 9-7 comeback thriller over the Texas Rangers — might have been their biggest of the season. Alex Rodriguez said it was. Didi Gregorius, who ended the game with a line drive over the right-field fence, would not go there.
“The biggest is yet to come,” Gregorius said. “We're playing better. A lot of stuff is going to happen, and we're going to play better baseball from now on.”
The Yankees can only hope so, because they still must reveal their true identity before the Aug. 1 trading deadline. They are 38-39 and leave for a 10-game road trip after Thursday's matinee. They trail by three and a half games for a wild-card berth.
Every team below the Yankees — Oakland, Tampa Bay, the Angels and Minnesota — is hopelessly out of it. But a victory like Wednesday's, when they trailed by five runs in the eighth, validates the Yankees' belief in their progress.
“We haven't been playing our best baseball this year,” said Brian McCann, who homered in the eighth and ninth. “But at the same time, we dug ourselves a hole early in April and we're getting out of it right now. We've just got to continue to play good baseball.”
They can also cling to the math. The last two times the Yankees had a losing record at this point, in 1995 and in 2007, they rallied to reach the playoffs. Two summers ago, the Kansas City Royals were two games under .500 on July 21. Three months later, they hosted Game 1 of the World Series.
The Yankees constructed this team with a late-game bullpen that could mimic those Royals, protecting leads after six innings with an overpowering trio of relievers. Getting leads, of course, has been the problem. The Yankees' aging and fragile lineup has rarely shown that it can handle good pitching.
Like the Mets, whose persistent story line is the health and workload of their young rotation, the Yankees tackle the same tiresome topic every day: How do they deal with this or that veteran who is injured, or slumping, or both?
Carlos Beltran was out of the lineup Wednesday with a sore right hamstring, which had forced him from Tuesday's game and will probably sideline him Thursday, too. Rodriguez, who is hitting .213, got a rare start against a right-handed pitcher and went 0 for 5. Mark Teixeira, who is recovering from a cartilage tear in his right knee, had a scheduled day off.
“If I overdo it, I'm going to be on an operating table,” Teixeira said. “I'm going to need a day here and there. It's a little sore. We're just going to keep managing it.”
A dash of hope, it seems, could come from outfielder Aaron Judge, who is hitting .395 with seven homers in his last 10 games for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. But the Yankees said Judge, 24, was not quite ready.
“The minor league people are trying to finish this kid off,” Manager Joe Girardi said Wednesday afternoon, “so when and if he gets here, he's here to stay.”
The Yankees held tight to Judge and their other prospects last July, and the aggressive Blue Jays raced past them to win the A.L. East. The Rangers used their deep prospect pool to trade for an ace, Cole Hamels, and bullpen help. They also sprinted to a division crown, and were the first A.L. team to 50 victories this season.
“We have a tremendous front office that is always looking for talented players, and they're not afraid to take some risk along the way,” Rangers Manager Jeff Banister said. “They're not afraid to really push some of the younger, talented players. They've been bold.”
The Rangers, like the Yankees, have several players with nine-figure contracts. But they also have a wave of productive young position players — Nomar Mazara, Rougned Odor and Jurickson Profar, who are all younger than Judge — and made the bargain signing of the winter by getting Ian Desmond for one year and $8 million.
The lack of dynamic, inexpensive talent is by far the Yankees' biggest problem, and the one that, in theory, could be helped by trading a reliever — Andrew Miller, Aroldis Chapman or both. Five division leaders — San Francisco, Washington, the Cubs, Texas and Cleveland — all have glaring bullpen needs.
But Miller is signed for two more years. Chapman could return as a free agent or bring back a high draft pick if he rejects a qualifying offer. The Yankees would need to exceed the value of that pick to trade Chapman — and to do it, they would also have to sink deep enough in the standings to make the rest of this season worth punting.
The Yankees are not there yet, but time is running out for the rally that would save their season. Wednesday was a start, but it might just be prolonging an illusion.

