Derrick Rose was halfway through a news conference Friday afternoon at Madison Square Garden when he was asked if he could guess why the Chicago Bulls — his hometown team, the franchise that picked him first over all eight years ago — had been so willing to trade him to the Knicks.
“No, I don’t know why I was traded,” Rose said, a smirk flickering across his face. “But I would like to tell them thank you — for real.”
The eclectic assemblage in the room (Spike Lee, wearing full team regalia, had claimed a front-row seat) tittered. Forgoing etiquette by not using a microphone to ask the next question, multiple reporters called out, asking Rose to elaborate, and he seemed happy to oblige.
He said he was thankful to have “another start.” He was happy that it was New York — no offense to other cities in the league, he said — a city and team with a big fan base and proud history. He was anticipating a positive reception.
“I’m just grateful,” Rose said. “I feel like they’re going to appreciate me a little bit more.”
So commenced what will be a honeymoon period for Rose and the Knicks. He smiled for cameras holding a white uniform top. He projected confidence, saying he ached to reach the playoffs. He told funny stories and made the crowd laugh comparing Chicago with New York. He was quietly defiant, thanking his old team for trading him.
But even Rose conceded that the present had taken on a dreamlike quality, that reality would set in a few months from now when the 2016-17 season begins.
“It still don’t feel real,” said Rose, who marveled about seeing his likeness on the massive digital screen on Seventh Avenue outside the Garden. “It kind of blew me away a little bit. It probably really won’t hit me until I step on the floor and actually have a jersey on.”
Only then will the Knicks and their fans be able to evaluate the deal completed Wednesday, when the Knicks acquired Rose, guard Justin Holiday and a 2017 second-round draft pick for Robin Lopez, Jose Calderon and Jerian Grant.
Rose, who will be 28 when the season begins, has won rookie of the year and most valuable player honors. He has made three All-Star teams. But, more relevant to many observers, he has also had three knee surgeries, which have zapped his old verve and kept him on the sidelines.
He appeared in only 100 games from the 2011-12 season to the 2014-15 season. Last season, he played in 66 games, with varying levels of success.
Rose, who is entering the final year of his contract, has been working out this summer in Los Angeles, maintaining a rigorous training schedule: He lifts weights and runs Monday through Thursday. He plays basketball on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday. He does yoga on Wednesday and Saturday. He rests on Sunday.
Rose said his body felt great, healthy. All he needed now was to play basketball for a prolonged period.
“This summer is all about conditioning and catching that rhythm again,” Rose said.
Rose, who was wearing a blue Knicks collared shirt, was only beginning to get acclimated to New York, but he was bullish about his new team, a 32-win group last season. He complimented Carmelo Anthony, calling him “a dog, just like I am.” He laughed when asked about the young, talented forward Kristaps Porzingis. “It was hard playing against him last year because, man, he’s so good, man,” Rose said.
He said he hoped to have a chance to play again with center Joakim Noah, his teammate in Chicago, who is a free agent. Both the Bulls and the Knicks missed the playoffs last season, and he said it was his goal to make it back.
Despite his subtle jab at his old team, Rose repeatedly said Chicago was important to him. His rued that he would need to be apart from his young son. He picked the uniform No. 25, which carries significance around Chicago: It was the number worn by Ben Wilson, a star player at Simeon High School, the high school Rose attended, who was shot in 1984 before his senior season.
“Chicago grew me into the man I am right now,” Rose said.
For now, he has embraced his new home. “With all of the attention and all of the congratulations I’ve got here, I hope I’ll be able to play the rest of my career here,” Rose said.
It was a fine sentiment to punctuate an agreeable introductory news conference. But, he acknowledged, words mean little. He will have to prove on the court that he could play like his old self.
“I feel like I’m close, but me sitting up here and saying it, that’s not going to do anything,” he said. “Next year, I want to let my game speak for itself.”

