WASHINGTON — Pitching is the bedrock of the Mets’ championship hopes. The ground shook below them before Monday’s game, then crumbled during it. More nights like this will swallow up the season.
Maybe it won’t be as bad as all that. But the Mets began a pivotal stretch of their schedule in about the most discouraging way possible. A young starter who did not pitch, Steven Matz, was found to have a bone spur in his tight left elbow. A young starter who did, Noah Syndergaard, lasted just three innings, allowed five stolen bases and blew a four-run lead.
The Washington Nationals kept on punching in an 11-4 victory that dropped the Mets to third place in their division. The Mets, who face winning teams in 22 of their next 25 games, had their pick of which pitcher’s plight was more troubling.
Syndergaard said his elbow felt fine — he denied reports of his own bone spur — but it was concerning to Manager Terry Collins. He pulled Syndergaard after watching him slog through two of his innings with poor command.
“I don’t need that thing to flare back up,” Collins said.
A serious elbow problem for Syndergaard would be devastating for the Mets, of course, but it would also be the least surprising injury in the major leagues.
Syndergaard is the hardest-throwing starter in the game, with the most violent slider since J. R. Richard’s. Four other young Mets starters — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Matz and the still-recovering Zack Wheeler — have already undergone Tommy John surgery. Syndergaard believes he can be the exception.
“I feel like I do a really good job of making sure my body is in top shape to perform every five days,” he said.
Matz said his elbow felt fine when he pitched here last month, spinning eight shutout innings for a victory. Now the Mets must decide if he can pitch through the pain of his bone spur, or if he has to have it removed. Matz, who underwent a magnetic resonance imaging exam in New York on Monday, emphasized the positive.
“No major structural damage,” he said. “That peace of mind is good.”
Matz said he was not finishing his pitches properly in his last start, on Friday in Atlanta, resisting that final bit of arm extension that makes a pitch crackle. The Braves attacked the lifeless stuff for eight hits and six runs in the fifth inning.
Matz shelved his new slider to see if that was the cause, but the tightness persisted. He played catch on Monday and seemed fine, but playing catch is not pitching.
The topic exasperates Collins, understandably. There is only so much a manager can do, only so much attention he can give to the fragile and vulnerable ligaments the season depends on.
“Every time he hangs a curveball, you can’t run to the mound, you know?” Collins said. “And that’s what it ends up being. You’re checking on him every inning. You’ve got to have confidence when you send him out there and say, ‘Hey, look, he’s going to pitch a good game, and hopefully he does.’ Otherwise, I mean, cripes, you can’t pay attention to other parts of the game because you’re always worried about what’s wrong. It’s legitimate, but that’s a lot of work. A lot of pressure on him.”
At 23, Syndergaard’s unscarred arm seems to be an anomaly. These days, pitchers are like the house Robin Williams’s character wants to buy in “The World According to Garp.” When he sees a small plane crash into a bedroom, he is convinced: This is the place for him.
“It’s been pre-disastered,” Williams says. “We’ll be safe here.”
The Nationals will start Lucas Giolito on Tuesday, the second time this month the Mets will have faced an elite pitching prospect making his debut after having Tommy John surgery. (The other was Jameson Taillon of the Pittsburgh Pirates, who nearly pitched a no-hitter against the Mets when he faced them a second time.)
Giolito will replace Stephen Strasburg, who had Tommy John surgery as a rookie in 2010 and now is out with an upper back strain. He will face Harvey, who had the surgery in 2013, in his first full major league season. DeGrom and Matz had their operations in 2010, long before they pitched in the majors.
“It’d be nice just to worry about the pitchers getting guys out and not anything else,” Collins said. “But that’s not going to be the case. Our conversations are always going to be about ‘Are they hurt?’ ”
As he left Nationals Park on Monday, Collins asked a club official for an update on Jose Reyes, who went 0 for 2 and played seven innings at third base for Class A Brooklyn. It was a reminder that Mets still need offense, but if Matz or Syndergaard needs rest, pitching depth becomes a problem, too. Impact deals are rarely painless; two starters the Mets dealt last summer, Michael Fulmer of Detroit and John Gant of Atlanta, have already graduated to the majors.
The Nationals have resisted all offers for Giolito, a 6-foot-6, 255-pound right-hander who has consistently ranked among the game’s best prospects. They drafted him 16th over all in 2012, knowing he had a damaged ulnar collateral ligament. Giolito rewarded their faith with a 2.74 E.R.A. in the minors, and more strikeouts than innings.
“He’s a big, physical kid that comes from a really tough angle to hit,” Nationals General Manager Mike Rizzo said. “He’s got great velocity, he’s got good spin on the breaking ball, he’s got good poise and demeanor on the mound, he keeps the ball around the strike zone and he can throw strikes with three pitches. It’s a good pitching package.”
The Nationals can dream on Giolito, another pre-disastered ace. But Matz was the same way. His immediate future is in doubt — and that might not have even been the worst news Monday for the Mets’ bruised rotation.

