EDINBURGH — Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's first minister, said Friday that a new referendum on independence in Scotland was “highly likely” now that Britain had voted to leave the European Union.
Voters rejected an effort to break free from the United Kingdom in a 2014 referendum, but Ms. Sturgeon said Scotland would take measures to protect its place in Europe and maintain access to the single market.
Ms. Sturgeon cited her party's election manifesto, which calls for another ballot if there is a “significant and material change in circumstances” from the 2014 vote, such as Scotland's being taken out of the European Union against its will.
The Scottish National Party, which Ms. Sturgeon leads, had promised after the referendum to deliver a more vibrant economy if the region were unshackled from the rest of the country.
But given the fall in oil prices and worries that Scotland will be unable to fund itself, Scottish leaders are now cautious about rushing into a new referendum. They are also calculating that it would be better off financially as part of the European Union than as part of an independent Britain.
Scotland will push for negotiations to leave the country inside the single European market, and Ms. Sturgeon can use the threat of the referendum as leverage in dealing with the British leadership.
Ms. Sturgeon sent a clear message by speaking to the Scottish people while standing in front of Scottish and European Union flags.
In sharp contrast to England and Wales, Scotland voted for Britain to remain in the bloc by 62 percent to 38 percent, with all of its 32 council areas in favor. Northern Ireland also voted overwhelmingly to stay.
“It is a significant and material change in circumstances,” Ms. Sturgeon said, speaking to reporters just hours after the referendum results were officially announced. “It's therefore a statement of the obvious that the option of a second referendum must be on the table, and it is on the table.”
A referendum should be held within the two-year time frame of Britain's exit from the European Union, she added, which will be enacted when the government in London invokes Article 50 of the bloc's governing treaty.
“If Parliament judges that a second referendum is the best or only way to protect our place in Europe, it must have the option to hold one in that time scale,” Ms. Sturgeon said. “I can confirm today that in order to protect that position we will begin to prepare the legislation that would be required to enable a new independence referendum to take place if and when Parliament so decides.”
The Scottish cabinet will meet on Saturday to discuss further measures, she said, and the government plans to hold urgent talks with the European Commission and members of the European Union to make clear Scotland wants to remain in the bloc.
While making clear that Scotland is taking a second hard look at independence, Ms. Sturgeon acknowledged the voters who voted against it two years ago, saying they were now more in favor.
“I know that they would not want me to simply assume their support or hear me talk about the challenges we face as if they are straightforward,” she said. “They would want me to be straight and honest with them.”
Across Scotland, people were stunned by the results of the referendum, but there were mixed reactions over the possibility of a second bid for independence. (The first one was described at the time as a “once in a generation opportunity.”)
J. K. Rowling, the author of the “Harry Potter” series, posted on Twitter that Scotland would now seek independence and that Prime Minister David Cameron's legacy would have been that of “breaking up two unions.” She added, “Neither needed to happen.”
David Grey, 58, who voted for Scotland to remain in the United Kingdom in 2014 and in the European Union because of economic security, said he would “vote for independence tomorrow if I could.” England and Scotland “have now diverged significantly,” he said.
Steven Murchie, 29, who works in a whisky shop, said he thought differently. He voted for Britain to leave and said he was not concerned with the economic downturn that Britain potentially faces.
“Britain has the financial stability that will allow it to function outside the E.U.,” he said, as he lifted bottles from a crate in the shop.
“Britain will be fine without the E.U., and Scotland, too.”

