Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. Here's a dispatch from the strange world of attraction and desire. It's early in the morning, coffee cooling in a cup beside me, and all I want to do is make Melissa Clark's recipe for queso fundido with chorizo, jalapeño and cilantro, then dive into it with a bag of good chips and some ice-flecked beer.
Is that so wrong?
Or, wait, maybe grilled pork and peaches would be better? (Fruit for breakfast!) It's a recipe I picked up from the chef Francis Mallmann, who is superfancy but probably wouldn't object if I used canned peaches if there are no fresh ones at the bodega at 8 a.m. — they caramelize nice.
What about making Florence Fabricant's recipe for wild salmon sautéed in smoked salmon butter? I could put that on a bagel. I could pair that with eggs.
I've made diner-style smash burgers for breakfast before. Perhaps I should again.
Some people love to eat shrimp and grits at the top of the day. That's cool. But what about Alexander Smalls's recipe for smothered shrimp in crab-meat gravy, on grits, instead? Wouldn't that be intense? Wouldn't that be a little better?
It would be. But I won't do it. I'll eat some yogurt and go to the cube farm and farm some cubes. I'll eat a sad desk lunch. And in the evening – well, then, I'll actually cook, and I hope you will, too, either off my reverie list above or out of the jeweled halls of our Cooking database. (That queso fundido is going to be so great.)
Take a look and see what you see. Maybe you'll want to make three-flower roast chicken this evening or on one very soon. Or grilled fish with horseradish crema. Or teff polenta with toasted hazelnut oil. Or a key lime pie.
Save any recipe that strikes your fancy to your recipe box so you don't lose track of it. Then cook it and let us know how it all turned out. You can rate recipes, of course. You can leave notes on them as well, to help yourself or others down the line. And if you run into problems, you can always reach out to us for help. We're at cookingcare@nytimes.com and standing by.
Now, would you take a gander at these images from “Turner's Whaling Pictures,” the J. M. W. Turner exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York? They called Turner a romantic. But, man, there's a lot of chaos and darkness beneath his beautiful light. Time for work!

