RIO DE JANEIRO — Members of the news media got a sneak peek at the so-called soul of the Rio de Janeiro Olympics with a visit Thursday to the athletes' village, the brand-new complex of residential towers where nearly 11,000 athletes and 6,000 coaches and handlers will sleep, eat and train.
Local organizers said the complex, which they described as a “city within the city,” was the largest in Olympic history.
In addition to the 31 17-story towers, the complex includes a huge cafeteria and gym, a post office, a first-aid center and a bank.
“This is where the soul of the Games will develop,” said Mario Andrada, spokesman of the local organizing committee.
While athletes are not required to stay in the village — many of the most popular stars may end up staying in alternative housing outside the complex — organizers said it would be the most secure facility at an Olympics, patrolled by 85,000 police officers and soldiers. That is twice the number of security personnel at the 2012 Games in London.
Two fences will ring the complex, and everyone traveling in and out will be subjected to airport-style security procedures, complete with X-rays of all incoming bags and luggage, the organizers said.
The idea is that once the athletes and their retinues are inside the security perimeter, “they won't need to leave the village,” said Mario Cilenti, the facility's director.
The 3,600 units include two-, three- and four-bedroom apartments with white tile floors and small balconies, some of which overlook a nearby hillside slum, known as a favela.
Each bedroom is equipped with two beds that can be extended to seven and a half feet for the tallest athletes, as well as what appeared to be a disposable wardrobe made of fabric stretched over a metal frame. In the living room, there are a few basic armchairs and a clothes drying rack.
Crucially, the apartments all come with air-conditioning units and electrical mosquito-repelling apparatus — aimed at preventing the spread of the Zika virus, which has been linked to a surge in Brazilian cases of microcephaly, a birth defect.
Cilenti said the setup hit the sweet spot between functionality and austerity — now a guiding principle of the Games, which will be played as Brazil endures its most severe economic recession in decades.
“There are no frills, just the basic necessities,” Cilenti said.
Eduardo Paes, the mayor of Rio, has stressed that little public money was spent on the Olympic project, with private companies taking on many of the key construction projects in exchange for concessions from the city. The athletes' village was built by a consortium that is renting the complex to the Olympic organizers during the Games. The city exempted the development from local zoning laws, allowing for taller-than-normal towers.
The developers have been marketing the apartments to the public, with buyers expected to move in after the Games.
Officials at Thursday's media visit declined to give any financial details about the athletes' village, explaining that only the builders could provide the project's cost or the asking prices for the units.
However, the local Olympic committee spokesman acknowledged that with a recession affecting Brazil, sales were not living up to expectations.
The consortium behind the project, which will be known after the Games as Ilha Pura, or Pure Island, is made up of two large construction companies: Carvalho Hosken and Odebrecht.
Odebrecht is a key player in the sprawling corruption investigation centered on Petrobras, the state-run oil company. Graft had long been such an ingrained part of Petrobras's modus operandi that it even had a specific department whose mission was to distribute bribes, investigators in the case have said.
Paes has insisted that all Olympic projects are corruption-free.

