FRONT PAGE
An article on May 26 about the complex calculus behind President Obama's decision to become the first sitting president to visit Hiroshima, Japan, referred incorrectly to one of the 11 presidents who have served since President Harry S. Truman's decision to drop an atomic weapon on that city. That president, Gerald R. Ford, succeeded Richard M. Nixon after Nixon's resignation; Ford was not elected.
INTERNATIONAL
Because of an editing error, an article on May 27 about a United Nations committee's decision to suspend its investigation of torture allegations in Ukraine, citing a lack of cooperation from government security services, misidentified the United Nations agreement that allows its inspectors to make unannounced visits to any detention center in countries that have signed the agreement, as Ukraine has. It is the Optional Protocol, an addendum to the Convention Against Torture, not the torture treaty itself.
•
Because of an editing error, an article on May 25 about the barring of Vietnamese activists from a meeting with President Obama during his recent visit to Hanoi referred incorrectly to one of those barred, a prominent blogger and journalist. The journalist, Pham Doan Trang, is a woman.
WEEKEND
A dance entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the River to River Festival in Manhattan misstated the given name of one of the performers in “The Set Up: Kapila Venu.” He is Jonathan Bepler, not Jordan.
•
A theater review on Friday about “Stet,” at Abingdon Theater Company in Manhattan, referred incorrectly to the woman whom Brock Turner, a former Stanford University undergraduate, was convicted of sexually assaulting. Although the assault occurred on campus, the woman was not a student at the university and was therefore not Mr. Turner's “Stanford classmate.”
SPECIAL SECTION: EDUCATION INNOVATION
An article on Thursday about free speech on campuses referred incorrectly to action taken by the board of trustees at Franklin & Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa., on a faculty statement promoting free speech. While the board would not adopt the faculty's language as part of a universitywide statement, it did permit the faculty to include the statement in its handbook; the faculty statement was not “vetoed” outright by the board.
OBITUARIES
An obituary in some copies on Friday about Ralph Stanley, the singer and banjo player who was a pivotal figure in the revival of interest in bluegrass music, omitted a survivor. Beside his wife, Jimmie; his daughters, Lisa Stanley Marshall and Tonya Armes Stanley; and a son, Ralph II, Mr. Stanley is survived by another son, Tim.
•
An obituary on Thursday about the Australian film director Paul Cox omitted a reporting credit. Michelle Innis contributed reporting from Sydney, Australia.
The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.comor (212) 556-7652.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

