A lawyer handling Johnny Manziel’s domestic violence case expressed doubts about the Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback’s ability to stay clean and said he was given a receipt that indicated Manziel may have spent more than $1,000 at a Dallas drug paraphernalia store just 15 hours after he was involved in a hit-and-run crash, according to a lengthy text message accidentally sent to The Associated Press.
The text from the defense lawyer Bob Hinton indicated Manziel’s legal team was seeking a plea deal with prosecutors but suggested that could be tricky.
“Heaven help us if one of the conditions is to pee in a bottle,” the lawyer wrote.
Jason Kipnis hit two of Cleveland’s four triples, and the visiting Indians continued their season-long dominance of the Detroit Tigers with a 7-4 victory.
The Indians are now 7-0 against the Tigers this season. Detroit had won 16 of 20 at home and was coming off a four-game sweep of the Seattle Mariners.
Cleveland starter Danny Salazar (9-3) struggled with his command, walking five in five and two-thirds innings, but he held the Tigers to three runs and four hits.
PIRATES’ MANAGER EARNS 1,000TH WIN Matt Joyce homered and doubled among his three hits as Pittsburgh beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 8-6, ending the Dodgers’ six-game winning streak and giving Pirates Manager Clint Hurdle his 1,000th career victory.
PADRES RAIN ON REDS’ CELEBRATION Wil Myers drove in five runs and Melvin Upton Jr. had two two-run homers as San Diego scored in each of the first eight innings of a 13-4 victory that spoiled the beginning of Cincinnati’s weekend celebrating the Big Red Machine’s victory in the 1976 World Series.
Andrew Beckwith pitched his second straight complete game and set a team record with his Division I-leading 14th win, and Coastal Carolina stayed alive at the College World Series with a 4-1 victory over Texas Christian in Omaha.
The Chanticleers, in the C.W.S. for the first time, forced a rematch Saturday night against a T.C.U. team that is in the tournament for the third straight year. The winner will make its first appearance in the best-of-three finals beginning Monday.
In the early game, Nathan Bannister and two relievers pitched a four-hitter, Arizona had 14 hits against what had been the best pitching staff in the tournament, and the Wildcats beat Oklahoma State, 9-3, also forcing a Saturday rematch, with the winner advancing to the title series.
Jon Rahm and Billy Hurley III shared the lead at the Quicken Loans National in Bethesda, Md., three strokes ahead of Vijay Singh going into the weekend.
Playing together, Rahm and Hurley went shot for shot to reach 11 under par. Hurley shot a six-under 65, and Rahm bogeyed the 18th hole for a 67 in his second round as a professional. Rahm led Thursday after a 64.
Rahm and Hurley will play in the final group Saturday, behind Singh, who was alone at eight under par after a 66.
JAPANESE MATCHES COURSE RECORD Ayako Uehara of Japan matched the course record with a nine-under 62 to take the first-round lead in the L.P.G.A. Tour’s NW Arkansas Championship at Pinnacle Country Club in Rogers.
Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia reached the Eastbourne International final in England after defeating the Puerto Rican qualifier Monica Puig, 6-2, 6-1. Cibulkova will play Karolina Pliskova of the Czech Republic for the title after Pliskova beat Britain’s Johanna Konta, 6-7 (5), 6-3, 6-3.
The world heavyweight champion Tyson Fury postponed his rematch with Wladimir Klitschko after hurting his left ankle during training.
Fury, who stunned the boxing world in November by ending Klitschko’s decade-long reign as heavyweight champion, said in a video posted on his Instagram account that he sprained the ankle while running 10 days ago. Doctors told Fury he needed to rest it for six to seven weeks.
The rematch was scheduled for July 9 in Manchester, England.

