The following essay discusses plot points throughout Season 4 of “Orange Is the New Black,” available in its entirety on Netflix.
The fourth season of “Orange Is the New Black” takes the series' theme song — “You've Got Time,” by Regina Spektor — more literally than ever.
Any prison story is focused on time: doing it, counting it. But this season, time becomes concrete, in the form of a cardboard and foil “time machine” that the mentally unsettled Lolly (Lori Petty) builds in Litchfield prison. It's a box inside a box, a hide-out and refuge.
Finding Lolly sitting inside this symbol, Healy (Michael Harney), the prison counselor, gives her a well-meaning, paternalistic speech. “Everyone wants to go back in time sometimes,” he says. “But it's not possible. All we can do is make the most of right now.”
“I've tried that,” Lolly says. “But traveling back in time just seemed more, you know, feasible.”
Yes, being able to change your past is a fantasy. But, argues this furious, jam-packed and (eventually) very good season, so is the homiletic idea that you can simply turn things around by focusing on the now — especially if you're spending that now in a place that encourages the worst and squashes the best.
(Speaking of things that can't be undone: spoilers for the full season lie ahead. This is your last warning, inmate.)
The season's story drive comes from another lyric in that theme song: “The animals” — the phrase that gives the title to the 12th and best episode — “trapped, trapped, trapped 'til the cage is full.” Prison means having all kinds of time and very little space, and there's even less of the latter to go around now.
That's because Litchfield prison, run by the for-profit company MCC, is being crammed with more women, for “30 grand per head in a bed,” as an executive describes the government payout. It's a mercenary operation, now staffed by mercenaries — ex-military correctional officers who see themselves as an occupying force.
The show's creator, Jenji Kohan, and her writers have a lot to say about the prison-industrial complex, and more besides. The season echoes the rise of alt-right white-supremacist politics as Piper (Taylor Schilling) finds her “task force” becoming a racist gang, and the death of Poussey (the luminous Samira Wiley) pointedly recalls the Eric Garner chokehold case.
But while the resonances are blaring, the characters are complex. The dynamic between Pennsatucky (Taryn Manning) and the corrections officer Coates (James McMenamin) is a lesson in treating rape as an act with lasting repercussions, as she decides to forgive him for her own sake and he wavers between guilt and denial. It's messy — it's deeply uncomfortable to see her kiss him — but believable for each character.
The new celebrity inmate, Judy King (Blair Brown), is another “Orange” character who simultaneously defies and lives up to type. She's down to earth — but not so much that she'll refuse a private room. She has a racist past, yet her contrived-for-the-tabloids smooch with Black Cindy (Adrienne Moore) leads to real, if fraught, camaraderie.
Like Litchfield, “Orange” has taken on a lot of bodies. The mammoth cast allows it a true diversity few series manage. Poussey's death, for instance, came after fans have protested other series for killing off a spate of other gay characters, often after a teasing moment of happiness. (Poussey had just settled into a relationship with Soso, played by Kimiko Glenn.) But unlike most other series, this one is still teeming with important, well-drawn L.G.B.T.Q. characters.
The show has rotated its deep bench, letting some characters recede and others step forward. Laverne Cox's Sophia has a limited, though harrowing, arc in solitary confinement this season, while Laura Gómez finds the coal-eyed intensity in the newly revolutionary Blanca.
Still, the drive to service dozens of characters leaves a lot of plot to juggle. Like many Netflix series, “Orange” could easily stand to be cut by 25 percent — though, granted, any given viewer would probably choose a different 25 percent.
But midway through, the season comes into focus as the conflict with the guards, under the harsh Officer Piscatella (Brad William Henke), becomes not just dysfunctional but terrifying. The last two of the 13 episodes are so remarkable as to raise an aesthetic question for the age of slow-build streaming shows: Do you measure the quality of a TV season as a beginning-to-end average or by how well it ends?
By the first yardstick, Season 4 is ambitious but uneven; by the latter, it's the series' best. The words of the ineffectual Warden Caputo (Nick Sandow), “This place crushes anything good,” come true, as the most reluctant participant in the prisoners' fateful antagonism ends up suffocated by Litchfield's meekest guard, Bayley (Alan Aisenberg), and the most vicious — for now, at least — prosper.
It all leads to a riot — a sharp contrast with the hopeful chaos of Season 3's prison break at the lake — and Dayanara (Dascha Polanco) clutching a gun in the hand that used to hold her drawing pen. You see something shift in her once-daydreamy eyes, and maybe in the series itself (which has at least three seasons left). This seems to be going somewhere new, and not somewhere uplifting.
For uplift, you can only look back. The time machine returns one more time in the finale, as Leanne (Emma Myles) and Angie (Julie Lake) drunkenly decide that it's bad luck and tear it to bits. Poussey, meanwhile, gets a posthumous flashback that leaves her at the end of a charmed night in New York City, smiling and full of seeming possibility. She can't travel back in time. But at least we can.

