Summer is the season to cool off with a big chunk of watermelon. But there’s another kind of watermelon that’ll have you trading in your sandals for hiking boots if you want to experience it. While you’re not going to want to eat what some people call “watermelon snow,” researchers have found that having a better understanding of it could be important in a warming world.
In snowy places across the globe, “watermelon snow” forms as the summer sun heats up and melts winter’s leftovers. The colorful snow is made up of communities of algae that thrive in freezing temperatures and liquid water, resulting in algal blooms. When these typically green organisms get a lot of sun, they produce a natural type of sunscreen that paints the slopes pink and red. The addition of color to the surface darkens the snow, allowing it to heat up faster, and melt more quickly.
“Imagine wearing black instead of a white T-shirt in the sun. It feels much hotter,” wrote Stefanie Lutz, a geobiologist at GFZ German Research Center for Geosciences, in an email. “It is the same for the snow: More heat means more melting.”
Dr. Lutz, together with Liane Benning and their colleagues at a number of universities, published a study Thursday in Nature Communications that examined microbes in summer snow, and noted that while bacterial communities differ from place to place, the same algae that produce watermelon snow appear to be so global that it’s time for climate models to consider their effects on snow and ice melt.
Algae changes snow’s albedo, or how much light, or radiation, its surface reflects back into the atmosphere. Based on 40 samples from four locations, the new study estimated that blooms of snow algae can lead to an albedo decrease of 13 percent over the course of an Arctic melt season, compared with clean snow, meaning the dark snow would absorb much more light. Just how much melting this will account for, or how much that may affect sea level rise, however, is still to be determined. But algal effects on albedo are going to be important for melting glaciers, which play a huge role in the climate system, said Dr. Lutz.
Current climate models take into account how soot from forest fires, dust from the Sahara or even increased water content (which slightly darkens snow to blue) affect albedo, but they have yet to measure biological effects, like that of algae.
“A small amount may have a big effect,” said Joseph Cook, a glaciologist at the University of Sheffield who was not involved in the study, but is looking at bacteria’s effect on the albedo of Greenland ice sheets (where ice turns brown, purple and gray in some cases).
Dr. Lutz worries that an interplay between today’s rising temperatures and the snow algae could cause a “runaway effect,” whereby melting snow would cause algae to bloom, which would darken the snow, causing more to melt, creating more water, which also darkens the snow and feeds the algae, and so on, in a circular pattern of cotton candy-colored surfaces melting.
If you’d like to cool down this summer with watermelon snow, the pink stuff can be found nearly anywhere that has melting snow — the Arctic, Antarctica, the Himalayas and the Rockies, among others. Logistics are important, said Dr. Benning, because these places aren’t easy to get to, and you’ll be hiking and camping in the cold, lonely wilderness. She says everyone has their favorite spots, but she likes the beauty and remoteness of a glacier in Svalbard: “A place where there are no worries about what happens back home.”

