OMAHA — Katie Ledecky was answering questions from reporters after winning the 400-meter freestyle Monday night at the United States Olympic swimming trials when a roar from the warm-down area drowned out her voice. The explosion of noise was for Leah Smith, the second-place finisher, who had arrived to cool down after giving Ledecky a roof-raising race at CenturyLink Center.
Ledecky, 19, had been two seconds ahead of her world-record pace at 200 meters but could not shake Smith, a rising senior at Virginia. Ledecky's winning time of 3 minutes 58.98 seconds was the third-fastest time in history, her best in two years and 0.61 of a second off her two-year-old mark, and still she never pulled away from Smith, who clocked a 4:00.65.
It was Smith's best time by almost three seconds. Only two women in the event's history, Ledecky and Federica Pellegrini of Italy, had swum the 400 faster.
“I'm probably more pumped about her race than mine,” Ledecky said of Smith's performance. “She pushed me. I need that.”
Smith, 21, who has won the 500-yard and 1,650-yard freestyles at the N.C.A.A. Division I championships the past two years, looked shocked when she glanced at the giant video board and saw her time. Her teammates tease Smith about being “Miss Morning” because she usually produces her fastest swims in the qualifying heats. The 4:03.14 that she swam Monday morning, which was the second-fastest time in the world this year, merely gave them more ammunition. But she showed them — showed everybody, really — what she was capable of.
“I felt like I had never been able to see her feet before,” Smith said, referring to Ledecky, “so that was pretty exciting.”
So was her time.
“It's my ultimate, ultimate goal to break four minutes, ever since I saw Federica do it when I was little,” said Smith, who was 14 in 2009 when Pellegrini became the first woman to clock under four minutes in the event, while wearing the buoyant suits that were banned shortly thereafter.
Ledecky's surprise inclusion on the 2012 Olympic team and her upset of Rebecca Adlington of Britain, the defending champion, at the London Games gave Smith, then 17, more motivation.
“Once Katie popped that 800 in London and took women's distance swimming to the next level that it hadn't been in a couple years, that just made everybody inspired,” she said. “She just showed how many barriers you could break.”
At the 2012 trials, her first, Ledecky finished third in the 400 freestyle before making the team in the 800. She missed a berth on the Olympic team in the shorter race by less than a second. Her time was a 4:05.00. Ledecky said she thought back to that final while resting before she took on Smith and the others Monday.
“It just shows how far I've come and how much experience I've gained and how much faster I've gotten, really,” she said.
Smith's improvement over the past four years has also been striking. She finished 14th in the 400 meters in 2012 with a time of 4:11.93. “I was nowhere near making the team,” she said, adding, “Been making steady progress.”
After her torrid start, Ledecky said, “I could tell I was tightening up just a little bit.” At the 150-meter mark, she was 0.39 of a second under her world-record pace, with Smith in dogged pursuit. The last 50 meters, Ledecky said, she kept chanting to herself, “Rio, Rio.”
Her goal of making a second Olympic team prompted her to defer her freshman year at Stanford. Her race with Smith on Monday was like a preview of the coming attraction that will be next year's N.C.A.A. championships. But before they become rivals, they will be teammates at the Rio Games.
“I think we're really going to represent the U.S. well in that event,” Ledecky said, adding, “Just to look up at the board and see how great a swim she had, too, it's just really inspiring.”

