In Alice Waese’s Fort Greene home and studio, alongside a bookcase piled high with others’ adventures, are shelves filled with objects that illustrate her own story as a jewelry designer. Meteorite-like silver rings, among the first pieces she made six years ago, lie near sleek double-finger rings that resemble mini Richard Serra sculptures. She points to a solid-gold bobby pin and turns over a new unfinished bracelet lined with silver pistachios that open and close. “I have a bit more of a commercial sensibility at this point, but it’s an evolution of what I’ve always done,” says Waese, a former design assistant to Maria Cornejo who began selling pieces in 2010, while in art school, at the London shop Hostem. “It’s still stream-of-consciousness. I start somewhere and end up someplace else.”
Her fall/winter 2016 collection, due in stores like IF Boutique, Tokyo’s Arts & Science and, of course, Hostem, next month, is rooted in a series of fantastical drawings from her imagination. Some of the items (a gold swan ring with emerald eyes and a necklace bearing a spoon pendant) appear to be reproduced directly from Waese’s sketches, and all have a naïveté about them. “I used these mushy, childlike textures,” she says, explaining that she did the first ones herself in wax and then developed molds using lost-wax casting for production in Manhattan’s jewelry district. “For the stones, I carved out holes and set them in there, and melted around them — I didn’t use any prongs, so each piece ends up being a little different.”
Waese champions a “season-less” approach (“so the pieces can be passed on for generations and they pick up a person’s energy,” she says), although she shows her jewelry alongside the pair of clothing collections she designs per year. And three clothing seasons in, she considers herself a part of the fashion world about as much as she does the jewelry world, which is to say: not very much. Waese maintains that “it’s possible to be a niche brand and to grow slowly and respectfully. Getting lots of attention isn’t the goal,” she continues. “The goal is well-conceived orders that don’t compromise on quality. That’s satisfying for me — and magical.”

