ATLANTA — A day before Jose Reyes was expected to become a free agent, Mets Manager Terry Collins could not help himself. Asked about Reyes, an All-Star shortstop when he was with the Mets, Collins admitted that there had been discussions about how to use him should he re-sign with the team.
“We have nothing etched in stone because he's not here,” Collins said before Friday's 8-6 win over the Atlanta Braves. “Even though they're not here, you've got to have some type of a plan in mind when he does get here.”
If Reyes is not claimed on waivers, he will be free to sign with any team starting at 1 p.m. Saturday. The Mets are interested in re-signing Reyes, 33, who the team believes could learn to play third base, bounce around the infield or even try left field. Indications were that the two sides were headed toward a reunion — and Collins was already talking that way.
“You have to discuss it,” Collins said. “It's the old where there's smoke there's fire. We've talked as a staff, if he happens to come here, where would he play? Where would he fit?”
Before reaching that point, the Mets ended a four-game losing streak to the Braves. The offense of Neil Walker (three hits) and James Loney (three-run home run) lifted the Mets to an 8-0 lead. But Steven Matz, who dealt with elbow stiffness in his last start, coughed up six runs and notched only one out in the fifth inning.
Matz, who struck out none for the first time in his career, said that his elbow has been tight but that it did not affect his pitching.
“I was able to throw the ball fine the first four innings and then it got away from me,” he said.
Hansel Robles cleaned up Matz's mess and tossed two and two-thirds scoreless innings. Jeurys Familia got the final four outs to become the first Met to open a season with 25 straight saves. He escaped the ninth thanks to a bad bunt by the Braves, a double play and Loney's glove.
The Mets also survived yet another injury scare: Yoenis Cespedes twisted his left ankle at first base during a seventh-inning pickoff but he stayed in the game.
Cespedes has been one of the few bright spots for an inconsistent Mets offense. With the trade deadline more than a month away, Reyes may be its best chance for help. And the Mets are one of the few places that can offer him a second chance after domestic abuse allegations ended his brief stay with the Colorado Rockies.
Reyes was arrested Oct. 31 after his wife told the police that he had grabbed her throat and shoved her into a sliding-glass door at a Hawaiian resort. But she did not cooperate with prosecutors, and the charges were dropped.
Major League Baseball, however, suspended Reyes 51 games without pay. Reyes returned to action in the minor leagues for the Rockies, but they designated him for assignment last week.
The Mets considered Reyes a part of their family for 12 years. They signed him out of the Dominican Republic in 1999 for $22,000. He ranks third in Mets history with 1,300 hits and first with 370 stolen bases in nine seasons with the club.
After Reyes won the 2011 National League batting title, the Mets did not make a formal bid, and he signed with the Miami Marlins for $106 million over six years. But the Marlins shockingly dismantled their team within months and traded Reyes to the Toronto Blue Jays. Reyes's production, particularly on defense, slipped with age and injuries during his two and a half years with Toronto.
If Reyes is remorseful the Mets could see re-signing him as an opportunity to help a former family member, much as they did with Wally Backman, whom they offered a path back into baseball as a manager in 2009.
Because the Rockies found no suitor willing to trade for Reyes, they placed him Thursday on release waivers, which lasts 48 hours. Teams are allowed to contact the representatives of a player on release waivers but cannot discuss terms. Reyes must decide which team offers him the best opportunity.
Reyes, who still maintains a home on Long Island, offers speed on the bases and an ability to reach base that the Mets lack. Curtis Granderson has been the Mets' leadoff hitter this season but was hitting .222 with a .314 on-base percentage going into Friday's game. The Mets have 13 stolen bases this season.
Reyes hit .274 with a .310 on-base percentage and 24 stolen bases in 116 games last season. If signed, Reyes may need time in the minor leagues to get at-bats and learn third base.
Reyes would most likely be a bargain. The Rockies, who traded for Reyes last July, are responsible for the nearly $41 million owed to him through next season. The Mets could simply sign Reyes to the prorated minimum, which would be under $300,000 for 2016.
Collins, who managed Reyes with the Mets in 2011, said he was a great player then. But what Collins liked most was Reyes's love of playing in New York.
“In my time around him, he was a joy to be around,” Collins said. “I just hope that, if it works out, he's that same guy.”

