As group play in Euro 2016 comes to a close Wednesday, fans — in Albania, Turkey, Austria and Iceland in particular — face a dizzying array of possibilities as they wonder whether their teams will make the Round of 16 as a third-place team.
Two third-place teams — Slovakia and Northern Ireland — are already in. But Albania and Turkey, which have three points each, must wait for Wednesday's results to know their fate. And seven of the eight teams to play on Wednesday could technically finish third in their group.
How to make sense of it all?
Below, we've created a table of teams that could end group play in third place. (Hungary has clinched a spot in the Round of 16 and could win its group or come in second or third.)
A team-by-team breakdown follows.
Turkey has completed group play and has a narrow but real path to the Round of 16. It has just three points and a negative goal differential. Its best case is for the third-place teams from Groups E and F to finish with two points or fewer. In Group E, that means losses or draws for Sweden and Ireland; in Group F, it means an Austria loss and a Portugal loss. The silver lining for Turkey: It is not Albania.
Albania's scenario mirrors Turkey's, except it trails Turkey in goals, which means its path is even narrower.
Belgium will advance with a win or draw against Sweden. Even if it loses, it will finish in third place as long as Ireland does not beat Italy. If Belgium comes in third, it should advance barring some truly unexpected scorelines.
Sweden has just one point and must beat Belgium to advance. If it loses or draws, it is eliminated.
Ireland faces Italy, which has already won the group. Like Sweden, Ireland needs no help from others to advance. If Ireland beats Italy, it will advance to the Round of 16. If Ireland loses or ties, it is eliminated. Good news for Ireland: The game is meaningless to the Italians.
Hungary has already clinched a spot in the Round of 16. It could technically finish in third place. If it does so, it would probably be at the expense of Turkey or Albania.
Iceland is in a surprisingly strong position and needs no help to advance. A draw against Austria would give Iceland three points and superior goal differential to Albania and Turkey. (Of course, Iceland can still win the group, as we've detailed here.)
Portugal is in the same position as Iceland. A draw would guarantee it three points, enough to advance over Albania and Turkey on goal differential. And, like Iceland, Portugal can finish Group F in any position.
Austria has just one point, but a clear path to the Round of 16. It must beat Iceland. Doing so would give it four points and guarantee a berth in the knockout competition, either as a second- or third-place team. A draw or loss eliminates Austria.

