LONDON — The International Cricket Council's meetings normally take place in Dubai. But this year's annual conference will start Monday in Edinburgh, a move that could be symbolic of the huge changes that may soon engulf cricket.
Two years ago, the council restructured, concentrating power and money in the hands of three of the biggest cricket-playing nations: Australia, England and India. The changes, which gave the three nations permanent positions on the main decision-making committees and gave them more I.C.C. revenue than the other 102 members combined, attracted plenty of criticism, some of it from Transparency International.
In the past year, the council has begun to take a different direction. Last fall, Shashank Manohar replaced Narayanaswami Srinivasan as president of the Board of Control for Cricket in India and chairman of the I.C.C., and he immediately criticized the 2014 changes. In November, Manohar said, “I don't agree with the three major countries' bullying the I.C.C.,” declaring, “you cannot make the poor poorer and the rich richer, only because you have the clout. The I.C.C. runs cricket throughout the world.”
Since then, Manohar has mandated that the chairman of the I.C.C. be independent — rather than simultaneously representing a country while serving — and resigned as president of the B.C.C.I. to remain in the post. The permanent positions of the “big three” on the I.C.C. executive committee and finance and commercial affairs committees have been scrapped.
Now, the council aims to go further. A five-member panel has been created to conduct a “complete review of the 2014 resolutions and constitutional changes” and will report in Edinburgh, aiming to get the council's board to agree to changes. Manohar would also like to see the B.C.C.I.'s share of I.C.C. revenue reduced, although this decision is now not his. “It is just at the discussion stage,” his successor as the control board's president, Anurag Thakur, said this month.
Besides further reversing the changes of 2014, the cricket council's main concern is how to safeguard the future of test cricket, the most prestigious form of the sport. Tests have been played since 1877, but the format is now under threat — partly because of the rise of the shorter Twenty20 cricket format, especially in domestic leagues such as those in Australia, India and the West Indies; partly from time pressures in the modern world; and also, it is believed, because test matches are so poorly structured. Test matches count toward the world rankings, but there is no overall league structure. The cricket council also believes that the sport needs more teams if it is to survive. Only 10 nations are currently permitted to play test cricket.
“Unless we can give some meaning to these series beyond the rankings and a trophy, then interest in test cricket will continue to waver,” David Richardson, the chief executive of the I.C.C., told ESPNCricinfo this month. “If we really want test cricket to survive, we can't have the number of test teams diminishing. We have to create a proper competition structure which provides promotion and relegation and opportunities to get to the top.”
The council's favored new structure for test cricket is for seven teams to participate in a Division One, and five in Division Two. Each country would play every other team in its division in a series, either home or away, every two years, with promotion and relegation and with lower-ranked teams able to win promotion to Division Two. Similar plans have failed before, however: the I.C.C's management first attempted to introduce divisions as far back as 2004.
There is renewed optimism this time. It is no coincidence that Division One would comprise seven teams, the same number of votes as are needed from among the 10 full members of the I.C.C. to be voted through. And the boards could also be driven to agree to the changes by self-interest. “A number of member countries are finding that they're not getting as much from their TV rights for bilateral cricket and they see the need to change and introduce some meaningful context,” Richardson explained in the Cricinfo interview.
Similar thinking underpins the council's hopes to introduce a new league of 13 countries for one-day international cricket; as with the plans for two divisions in test cricket, this would take effect starting in 2019. The rationale is similar to that for test cricket: to introduce more context for the matches, allow emerging countries to rise and thereby help to increase interest from spectators and commercial partners.
In the context of the council's fears about the rise of T20, the decision to return the World Twenty20 to being held every two years, from every four, which is expected to be ratified in Edinburgh, seems a curious one. But the council hopes that the extra revenue generated from more editions of the competition can be used to fund matches within the envisaged two-division test structure. In this way, far from ending test cricket, the hope is that T20 could help to save it.

