As the Mets pitched their way to a World Series appearance last year, the name Omar Minaya kept coming up. He may have been fired in 2010, but moves he had made were largely responsible for the team’s talented young roster.
It is with that in mind that executive departures in sports, which often seem to carry a great deal of finality, should actually be considered unfinished business until the various permutations of moves they made have come to fruition.
Case in point: The name on the tip of everyone’s tongue at the N.B.A. draft on Thursday was Sam Hinkie, the former general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers, who had resigned in April with a long and somewhat confusing letter addressed to the team’s ownership that was eventually leaked to the news media.
Hinkie may have been replaced at the helm of the team by Bryan Colangelo, but the familiar refrain associated with him, “Trust the process,” was mentioned several times by players and the news media as the 76ers went about using the three first-round picks — including the No. 1 overall selection — that Hinkie’s plan had led to the team’s controlling. One fan at the draft was holding a sign that said, “Hinkie Died for Your Sins.”
Ben Simmons, whom Philadelphia chose with the No. 1 pick, got the ball rolling with Hinkie’s words when he posted a photo to Instagram earlier in the week of him working out for Philadelphia with a caption that read, “Trust the process.” Asked about that after his selection, he was a little coy about his motivations.
“I’m a part of the family now, so you’ve got to trust it,” he said. “You’ve got to go with it, and you’ve got to work hard.”
When asked if he understood where the phrase came from, or its meaning, he said he understood it “a little bit” and was “a little bit aware of it.”
What he was referring to, of course, was Hinkie’s decision to strip the roster and essentially lose on purpose while acquiring a staggering number of future draft picks to one day rebuild the 76ers into a competitive team around the lottery picks they have made in recent years.
More than a few of those picks have not exactly worked out.
Philadelphia came about the No. 1 selection this season the old-fashioned way, by losing more games than anyone else, but the team also had the Nos. 24 and 26 picks thanks to Hinkie’s willingness to essentially help out other teams in exchange for future picks.
The No. 24 pick, which the 76ers used on Timothe Luwawu-Cabarrot, a 21-year-old wing from France, was acquired when the team helped facilitate the trade that sent Kevin Love to the Cleveland Cavaliers and Andrew Wiggins to the Minnesota Timberwolves. The 76ers sent out Thaddeus Young, who was productive but flawed and somewhat wasted on a team not yet interested in winning, and got back the first-round pick and Luc Richard Mbah a Moute and Alexey Shved, neither of whom made it to a second season with the team.
The No. 26 pick, which the Sixers used on Furkan Korkmaz, an 18-year-old guard from Turkey, was acquired when the team agreed to take JaVale McGee’s salary off the hands of the Denver Nuggets and was given a first-rounder for its trouble. McGee played six games for Philadelphia before he was waived.
While neither Luwawu-Cabarrot nor Korkmaz is a familiar face to an American audience, both are assets acquired with little cost to the team, and if they end up being productive, the credit will at least partly have to go to Hinkie. Similarly, the team has a massive stockpile of picks over the next few seasons, according to the website RealGM.com, including a top-three-protected first-round pick from the Los Angeles Lakers next season (that would be unprotected in 2018); an optional first-round pick swap next season with Sacramento; and a 2019 first-rounder from Sacramento. In addition, it is owed seven second-round picks from various teams.
Beyond the various draft picks, it is difficult to add up the pluses and minuses of the Hinkie era because his moves can be hard to unpack. He worked remarkably hard through drafting and trading to acquire the rights to Nerlens Noel, Joel Embiid, Dario Saric and Jahlil Okafor. While Noel and Okafor have been at least somewhat productive, neither Embiid nor Saric has played in the N.B.A. yet.
Simmons, while not necessarily a consensus selection at No. 1, is considered a good bet to succeed in the league. But figuring out whom he will be playing with as he develops is a mystery. Philadelphia is currently working on bringing Saric over from Europe and otherwise has only two nonguaranteed contracts — Kendall Marshall and Richaun Holmes — and a few team options on players beyond next season. An interesting referendum on the Hinkie era is on the way soon as Philadelphia will have to make difficult calls on whether to extend Noel’s and Embiid’s contracts.
As the Mets proved, years can pass before an executive’s legacy can be determined. Hinkie has those who discredit him entirely for his failures while others are determined to prop him up because of the position he has put the 76ers in. The truth, as it often does, probably lies somewhere in the middle.
But Embiid, whose main contribution to the team has been his impressive presence on social media, clearly approved of the move to get Luwawu-Cabarrot.
After the pick, Embiid, who grew up in Cameroon, wrote on Twitter: “Someone to speak French with... Congrats my boy!!!”
For Hinkie’s reputation, and Philadelphia’s ability to compete, the 76ers will have to hope that beyond speaking French, Embiid and Luwawu-Cabarrot can also play basketball on the same court at some point.

