JUCHITÁN DE ZARAGOZA, Mexico — To the people of this town in southern Oaxaca State, the existence of a third gender is as much a part of life as the ancient Zapotec language they speak and the huge, spiny iguanas that laze in the trees.
Here, the muxes — people born with male bodies but who identify as neither male nor female — are part of the social fabric, admired for their embroidery, hairstyling, handicrafts and cooking.
They even have a grand ball every autumn, and their queen is crowned by the mayor.
But now this town of fishermen, farmers and extravagant fiestas about 30 miles from the Pacific Ocean faces a challenge to its expansive notion of gender: the transgender community and its bathroom rights.
On a recent sweltering night, three muxes (pronounced MOO-shays) in brightly embroidered dresses waited outside a women's portable toilet at one of Juchitán's annual outdoor fiestas. Men whistled at them and pointed to the dark corner that served as their restroom.
The muxes held their ground, and when the toilet door swung open, one stepped inside.
“I'm a woman, 24 hours a day,” said Naomy Méndez Romero, her braids crowned with a fuchsia ruffle.
“Me, use a boys' bathroom?” said Ms. Méndez, 24, who was born male but has lived as a woman for six years. “No.”
The issue is testing the limits of tolerance and prompting some to re-examine the Zapotecs' complex gender taxonomy.
“We are in a process of redefinition,” said Gubidxa Guerrero, an anthropologist and the president of Comité Melendre, a local nonprofit group that promotes civic participation.
A mixed-gender way of life was accepted in several pre-Columbian communities across Mexico, according to anthropologists and colonial accounts. It is unclear when the muxe tradition originated in Juchitán, or how it endured.
Muxes dress as men or women, and tend to be feminine in their manners and the way they express themselves in the Zapotec language, experts said. Often, they live with their parents and dedicate themselves to the household. Muxes usually have relationships with men, but that is not what defines them, experts and muxes say.
The bathroom issue intensifies during the spring fiestas, or velas, in May, when thousands of people gather to dance and drink.
Pedro Enrique Godínez, a beautician and the director of gender diversity policy for the municipal government, said that over the past 10 years there had been a “transgender revolution” in Juchitán. There have always been muxes who wore women's clothes, he said, as he tucked gypsophila and yellow chrysanthemums into a young woman's coiffure in his salon. But they did not identify as women or consider changing their bodies.
Sometimes tolerance goes only so far. A few months ago, Ms. Méndez was asked to stop using the women's restroom at the Technological Institute of the Isthmus, where she studies industrial engineering.
“Now I don't use either,” she said, sewing a huipil, or traditional top, in the doorway of the small home she shares with her parents and sister. “I hold on.”
José Antonio López Rios, the president of the institute's student committee, said it had ruled against allowing muxes to use women's restrooms because there had been “a lot of complaints” from students.
The committee has offered any muxe student who does not wish to use the men's bathroom access to its office bathroom, he said. Javier Echeverria, a spokesman for the institute, said it had little experience with transgender students and was designing a policy “as it went along.”
Disputes over bathroom access in Mexico have been much quieter than in the United States, yet gay and transgender rights have expanded in recent years.
The Mexican Supreme Court ruled last year that it was illegal to ban same-sex marriages, and President Enrique Peña Nieto said in May that he would submit a proposal to the Mexican Congress to turn that ruling into federal law. The proposal would also make it easier for transgender people to change their gender identity on passports.
Still, gay and transgender Mexicans face harassment and violence. The United States last year granted asylum to a transgender Mexican on the grounds that she was at risk of torture by the police.
In Juchitán, notions of transgender culture and rights have grown as social media and travel connect young people to the wider world, said Victor Cata, a local linguist and writer.
That has prompted questions over whether someone can be both muxe and transgender. Mr. Cata believes the answer is yes. “It's a very broad concept,” he said. “The boundaries are not fixed.”
Yet some older residents, including muxes, see being transgender as a cultural import or even faddish.
“The muxe is born with a gift,” said Armando Cano, 72, who sells traditional sweets in the market and said he had inherited his muxe genes from his uncle. But now, he said, “there is no respect.”
“They are playing,” he added, referring to muxes who identify as women.
Umberto Santiago, who was among a group of men trying to shoo Ms. Méndez and other muxes from the portable women's toilet at the vela last month, said it was a matter of hygiene.
In some cases, vela organizers add a portable toilet for muxes; in others, they bar muxes dressed as women from entering.
“Why don't they let us join in?” asked Yoceline Vasquez, 29, who identifies as a woman and takes female hormones. “We're the ones who make their dresses,” she said. “We're the ones who embroider them. We're the ones who style their hair.”
But some women said they saw the muxes as rivals.
“We want to show off in our outfits,” said Josefa Santiago Santiago, 51, referring to the handmade ensembles that can cost as much as $800. “We don't want our men distracted.”
Data on the muxe population is scant. An academic study of one Zapotec village in the 1970s estimated that 6 percent of the males were muxe. Mr. Godínez, the municipal policy official, said that his team had tried to collect data on gender last year, but that many households had declined to take part.
In interviews, muxes seemed divided over whether a third bathroom was a solution. Some said that it would eliminate tensions, others that it would reinforce divisions.
Several muxes said they felt wider prejudice. Many are valued by their families because they are unlikely to marry and leave, and some are professionals. Those who dress or identify as women, however, can face rejection and are not taken seriously, they said.
Pili Valvidieso Morales, 24, said that her grandfather did not like to see her dressed as a woman and that the priest in the nearby fishing village of Santa Rosa de Lima, where she lives, would not say Mass for her on her birthday unless she wore men's clothes.
“You're accepted up to a point,” Ms. Méndez said, flashing long red nails that her father had painted for her. Still, she added, “How many trans finish university?”
For Ms. Méndez, who wants to work in the oil industry or the wind farms near Juchitán, dealing with the bathroom question at school is part of gaining acceptance.
“As trans-muxes, we can do more than sew and embroider,” she said. “We just want to be integrated.”

