Anyone who has ventured into a New York City woodland in early summer has probably experienced the intoxicating scent of Japanese honeysuckle. Though there are native plants as fragrant in the evening — linden comes to mind — generally speaking, New Yorkers need only follow their noses to the ubiquitous Japanese honeysuckle to find the source. To naturalists, however, the sweet scent of honeysuckle smells like trouble.
Though perceptible at any time of the day, the fragrance of Japanese honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica) is most potent in dimming light. Its aroma permeates vast acres with a mouthwatering, heady fragrance. This evening perfume and the vine’s pale, tubular flowers are diagnostic of moth-pollinated plants, and in its native home of Japan and Korea, honeysuckle is indeed pollinated by night-flying hawk moths. Interestingly, our own native moths, as well as several species of bees and wasps, and even hummingbirds, are pollinators of this highly successful species.
A close examination of honeysuckle flowers reveals long stamens, each tipped with a powdery, pollen-covered anther. These anthers are positioned to dab pollen onto the foreheads and bodies of would-be pollinators. To lap up the sweet nectar deep in the flower’s throat, pollinators then brush into the equally elongate pistil, with its sticky-headed stigma, upon which the grains of pollen adhere.
Honeysuckle is not solely dependent upon sexual reproduction, though; the aggressive vine reproduces vegetatively as well, easily rooting where its stems contact the ground. There is little doubt these strategies are effective: Japanese honeysuckle can be found on every continent but Antarctica.
It is interesting to note the speed with which Lonicera has spread. Though there is some debate, William Kerr, a 19th-century collector for Kew Gardens in London, was probably responsible for honeysuckle’s first recorded appearance outside Asia, in 1806. The plant’s emergence in North America began in earnest in 1862, when George Hall, a physician and plant breeder, introduced a popular and vigorous variety. Japanese honeysuckle made its first dash for freedom in the New World along the banks of the Potomac River in 1882. The blame does not lie with plant collectors alone. Japanese honeysuckle was highly recommended for erosion control, and to add beauty to planting sites well into the 20th century.
In a paper in Critical Reviews in Plant Science, the researcher Kristina A. Schierenbeck wrote, “There is little doubt, had William Kerr been conscious and concerned with the introduction of invasive species, he would have preferred to enjoy Japanese honeysuckle in Asia exclusively.”
Water under the bridge, perhaps.
Today, Japanese honeysuckle can be found throughout the Northeast, and except in cases where very rare plants or woodlands are threatened and eradication may still be warranted, we must learn to accept the inevitable. Make time to stop and smell the honeysuckle: Its fragrance is no less beautiful in its new home.

