BIRDSONG A Story in Pictures By James Sturm 56 pp. Toon Books. $12.95. (Picture book; ages 4 and up)
Many of my favorite wordless picture books — “Wave” by Suzy Lee; “Sidewalk Flowers,” by JonArno Lawson and Sydney Smith; “The Grasshopper and the Ants,” by Jerry Pinkney — push me into a deeply internal, nonverbal mood. I just want to look and look and stay quiet. I don't want the story to have specific words attached. I'm sure there are many children who feel the way I do about books like these. But children's books people are always advising grown-ups to make kids “tell the story” of a wordless picture book, since decoding visual narrative is a step in the process of learning to read.
So I was happy to find James Sturm's “Birdsong,” a gorgeous wordless book with a snappy mood that seems to explicitly invite out-loud storytelling. It's about a girl and a boy who are turned into monkeys after menacing some local wildlife, and the action-packed story moves at a leaping pace that distinguishes it from the dreamier wordless picture books out there.
We learn in an afterword that Sturm, the author of the Adventures in Cartooning series as well as the “Ape and Armadillo” picture books, was inspired by the Japanese tradition of kamishibai, or “paper theater.” Building on a Buddhist practice of telling stories using picture scrolls, performers in the 1920s would bicycle from village to village with wooden boxes holding stacks of images from stories inspired by the silent films of the West. As they rotated through the images, the performers provided dialogue and sound effects to enthralled children — then sold them candy.
Each left hand page of “Birdsong” is blank white with a leafy decorated margin, as if to remind children to provide their own words for what's happening on the right. The boy and girl start out with nasty looks on their faces, wielding sticks that they use to flip a helpless turtle and startle a red bird. As they chase the bird, it leads them to a fearsome human figure holding what looks like a magic scepter, which he uses to transform them into monkeys. Then it's the children who are preyed upon — first by a hungry lion, then by a carnival man who captures them, shackles them to a cage and makes them perform, writing sums and letters on a chalkboard for a gaping audience.
There's an incredible page with a close-up drawing of the monkey's faces, sad and chastened. When they escape and, looking contrite and gentle, are reunited with the red bird, we are set up for a happy ending. But it's not so happy that the lesson goes down easy — the two don't get to return to their human form, but remain monkeys. Sturm joins the cinematic, entertainment-oriented kamishibai with its Buddhist precursor, which focused more on moral instruction.
When we say goodbye to the monkey children, they are swinging playfully in a tree in a deepening dusk. It's a page you want to linger on after whatever words it inspires are gone.

