Actors often go through a mourning period when a show ends, and they have to say goodbye to the character they have embodied for months or years onstage. But Alexandra Silber took the grieving process to new extremes.
After she spent two years performing as Hodel in a production of “Fiddler on the Roof” in England, Ms. Silber had immersed herself so thoroughly in the character that she couldn’t stop thinking about her. So she started writing about what happens to Hodel, one of Tevye’s five daughters, after she boards a train to Siberia.
“When it was over, I was grieving this character,” Ms. Silber said in an interview, as if she were “a real person who suddenly stopped calling.”
“She was so deeply in my bone marrow,” she continued. “I had to know what happens to this 18-year-old girl who gets on a train and goes to Siberia in the name of love.”
What began as a personal thought experiment morphed into a full-blown novel. Ms. Silber recently sold the book, “After Anatevka,” to Pegasus, which plans to publish it next summer.
“After Anatevka” picks up Hodel’s story where “Fiddler” drops off. In “Fiddler,” which is set in the Russian shtetl Anatevka at the turn of the 20th century, Hodel stuns her father, the dairyman Tevye, when she announces that she has decided to marry Perchik, a tutor to her younger sisters. After Perchik leaves for Kiev, and is later exiled to Siberia, Hodel follows him.
Ms. Silber’s book opens in a Siberian prison, where Hodel is being held after she arouses suspicions as a young, unmarried woman traveling alone. In her cell, Hodel remembers life in the shtetl with her family, and exchanges letters with her older sister, Tzeitel. The second act of the novel centers on Perchik, who is in a labor camp. Through flashbacks the narrative covers familiar ground from “Fiddler on the Roof” and from the original 19th-century Yiddish stories, by Sholom Aleichem, on which the musical is based.
Ms. Silber spent three years writing the book, and traveled to Siberia to research it. “My ancestors are Russian shtetl Jews, so there was this incredible sense of homecoming in multiple dimensions,” Ms. Silber said.
After she finished writing the novel in 2013, she set it aside and had little expectation of ever publishing it. She threw herself into other roles, starring in the Off Broadway musical “Arlington,” and playing Eliza Doolittle in “My Fair Lady,” in St. Louis.
But last year, she was cast in the current Broadway revival of “Fiddler on the Roof,” this time as the oldest daughter, Tzeitel. She revisited the novel, and decided that maybe it was worth publishing, after all. Iris Blasi, an editor at Pegasus, bought it in a two-book deal, along with “White Hot Grief Parade,” Ms. Silber’s memoir about losing her father to cancer when she was 18.
[ Read Charles Isherwood’s review of the Broadway revival of ‘Fiddler on the Roof’ ]
Now Ms. Silber is playing Tzeitel eight times a week. In her performance, she has drawn on the letters that she wrote in Tzeitel’s voice in the novel. “What began as me bringing work from the theater into the book has now become me bringing work from the book into the theater,” she said. “I have a little rewriting to do, because now I understand Tzeitel in a different way.”

