As the first round of boos rained from the stands at Yankee Stadium on Sunday afternoon, Nathan Eovaldi shuffled around behind the pitcher’s mound trying to regain his equilibrium. In a quick succession of swings — first by Brian Dozier, then by Trevor Plouffe — Eovaldi’s outing had imploded. With back-to-back home runs in the sixth inning, the woebegone Twins had broken open a previously one-run game.
It had turned into another lost opportunity for the Yankees. Facing the team with the worst record in baseball, the Yankees’ starting pitcher faltered once again, and an expensive lineup returned little for the club’s investment. When Max Kepler bashed another home run off Eovaldi two pitches later, the misery only continued.
The game was emblematic of the Yankees’ deepest issues. Thirteen days before, when they landed in Colorado, they eyed the coming 11-game stretch as a possible boon for their season. With four games against the sub-.500 Rockies and seven against the Twins, it was an opportunity to lard up for a postseason chase they still believe is possible. Instead, with Sunday’s 7-1 loss to the Twins, they went just 6-5 in that stretch and lost ground in the American League East.
And in failing to pad their record against the dregs of baseball, the Yankees were shown again that they might not be that good themselves. They sat at 37-37 after failing to sweep the Twins — seven and a half games behind the first-place Baltimore Orioles — and will host the league-best Texas Rangers for four games this week.
“We need to make up ground,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “No matter who we’re playing, we need to win series. And you win a series here, but it’s frustrating because we had a situation where we won three in a row there and we weren’t able to win the fourth. We win two in a row, you’re not able to win the third. The teams in front of us are playing well.”
The sixth inning was a microcosm of what ails them. The Yankees did not notch their first hit until the bottom of that inning, when Aaron Hicks hit a double. By then, they already trailed, 5-0. Tyler Duffey, the Twins’ unremarkable right-hander, belied the 6.18 seasonal E.R.A. he took to the mound with eight dominant innings. The only run he allowed was from an eighth-inning homer by Mark Teixeira. The Yankees, meanwhile, allowed more home runs (six) than they had hits (two).
Eovaldi unraveled quickly, undone by the same bugaboo that has bothered him all month. In five starts in June, he has allowed 10 home runs — tied for the most of any pitcher in baseball this month — and has already given up more than in any previous season. The Twins scored five earned runs off him in six innings.
The Twins’ Danny Santana belted a home run in the third to open the scoring, but that seemed like an outlier until Dozier smacked his two-run shot with two outs in the sixth. Eovaldi said that his problems had stemmed from his falling behind in the count, but of the four home runs he allowed, he had been ahead in the count in half of those at-bats.
“I’m not thinking about home runs,” he said. “I’m not thinking about giving up another. I’m thinking about attacking.”
But he also received little backing from the Yankees’ offense. A club that scored the second-most runs in baseball last season has seen that same formula fail them this year. A lineup stocked with players whose salaries and reputations have out-traveled their performance ranks among the five worst in the American League in several key statistical categories.
On Sunday, Alex Rodriguez was left on the bench because of his problems against right-handed pitchers, while Jacoby Ellsbury, Brian McCann and Chase Headley went without a hit in 10 total at-bats.
Teixeira homered in what was his second game back from the disabled list. He had not hit a home run in 147 at-bats, dating to April.
“That was important for me to show I can still do it,” Teixeira said. “It’s been a tough season.”

