LONDON — The two hemispheres that have dominated world soccer for the past century have reached a decisive weekend in their separate ways.
In France, the latest version of the European Championships stops being a cagey group competition in which only the weakest third of 24 nations was eliminated by a slow process — and gets down to proper knockout play.
The pick of the games ahead will be Croatia against Portugal in Lens on Saturday, France versus Ireland in Lyon on Sunday, and Italy playing Spain at St. Denis north of Paris on Monday.
England facing Iceland, also Monday in Nice, is ripe for a giant-slaying romance, if the smallest nation by far in this tournament can pull it off.
Intriguing matches, to be sure, especially the one in Lyon, because of something that has festered for nearly seven years, since Thierry Henry's blatant hand ball set up a goal that was allowed and eliminated the Irish from the 2010 World Cup.
France, as everyone knows, puts a heavy emphasis on justice. There might be many a neutral wishing Ireland a smell of that on Monday; and since Henry is now a broadcaster with the BBC for this tournament, his take on anything controversial will be interesting.
Moving on, across the Atlantic, the Copa América Centenario being hosted by the United States ends Sunday. Argentina and Chile make deserving finalists for the big game in New Jersey. They were, after all, the last two teams in the real Copa América, staged in Chile one year ago and won by Chile, on a penalty shootout after the game and extra time ended goalless.
The Centenario, partly an excuse to commercialize soccer in the United States, has delivered a tournament that many can see as superior to the Euros. You want goals? The Copa has averaged three for every game played; Europe so far is at fewer than two per game. Maybe that will change, now that the contests are winner take all, and strategic draws are no longer of any use.
But are there better strikers in Europe or South America? There's a reason Argentina, with Lionel Messi, Sergio Aguëro and Gonzalo Higuaín, is thrilling crowds of up to 70,000 fans. And that even extends to the American host's being humiliated 4-0 in a semifinal that showed just how far off world standards the United States men's team still is.
Jurgen Klinsmann, the head coach of the Americans, said, and may even have meant, that he thinks the United States needs to play the likes of Chile, Argentina and Brazil (he included the latter despite its early elimination from this tournament). Whether America would be best served by regular thrashings, or should instead concentrate resources on improving standards among the masses of youngsters playing in America now who want to grow into world-class players is a question for the United States Soccer Federation.
It isn't just America that had a spotlight on its deficiencies after inviting such highly professional — and ruthless — guests. Mexico's 7-0 demolition at the hands of Chile was enough to make the eyes water for that nation, which sometimes makes beautiful Latino incursions into the global game.
The loudest debate now in the United States is whom to blame, and obviously Klinsmann, who has had responsibility for men's soccer in the States for five years, is taking the flak. He was right, though, about one thing: “If you compare this Copa América with these 16 nations to the Euros,” Klinsmann said before play began, “then I almost think you have more quality in this Copa than you have in the diluted, 24-team version of the European Championship.”
He is right. The quality of Messi and his South American pals like Neymar, Luis Suárez, Dani Alves and Javier Mascherano is intrinsic to what makes Barcelona such a beautiful sight to behold.
Diego Latorre, a player once considered to be a future Diego Maradona, is now a commentator for the Fox Latin American channel. He wrote in Argentina's La Nacion newspaper last Sunday: “On this side of the Atlantic, most players think first about dribbling, and top strikers in the Copa América have this in their soul.”
They do, but when you have more than 3,000 Brazilians going to European clubs for the money, some in their teens, that romantic Latin instinct gets dulled somewhat by the obedience imposed by more regimented European play.
Yet nothing has been a more thrilling adventure than what Leicester City pulled off in the billionaires' playground of English soccer this year. And nothing has surpassed, in terms of a similar sort of spirit against the odds, the 1992 Denmark team that came together on 11 days' notice and won the Euros.
In Copenhagen this month at the unveiling of “Europamestrene,” a book commemorating 25 years of the European Championship, I shared dinner with some of those Danish players. Kim Vilfort, the player whose goal finished off the final victory against Germany, and defenders John Sivebaek and Torben Piechnik were at that dining table.
Pleasant men in sporting retirement, and perfectly willing to share their memories, It was hard to get many words in edgewise. You wouldn't really wish to because what was born in that summer of '92 so evidently still lives on to this day.
Those Danes formed a closeness, a shared spirit, that took them all the way beyond the English, French, Dutch and Germans. Small was beautiful then; there were just eight nations in the finals.
Today, as Klinsmann suggested, 24 are too many. Iceland, Wales and Northern Ireland will not agree. But much of the cautious play around France seemed determined by the weight of numbers and by teams' not daring to score until the final moments.
South Americans, possibly, dream too much of pleasing the crowd. Europeans play with the emotional handbrake on, until pushed.
May all that change, now that the knockout phase has commenced.

