There are very few sad moments when it comes to baking butter cakes with ripe summer berries.
True, there could be some fretting when it comes to waiting for the cake to cool. And there’s always the resigned sigh when the last piece is devoured and all the crumbs licked off the plate.
But for the most part, a soft, moist cake dotted with juicy berries that explode into tart jammy pockets in the oven’s heat should yield nothing but pleasure.
Unless, that is, you’ve got your heart set on a cake in which the berries remain on top in a colorful design instead of sinking into the batter.
This was my goal, and it seemed like a modest one. But as I witnessed cake after cake emerge from the oven with the pretty berries I’d arranged on top sunken beneath the golden crumb, I realized it would take some finessing.
I could have tinkered with the structure of the cake so it could physically support the berries. But I didn’t want to muck with its melt-in-the-mouth lusciousness. Rich with butter and almond flour for tenderness, and speckled tan with buckwheat flour for a nutty, grainy depth, the crumb had the taste and texture I wanted.
So instead, I changed pans.
Part of the reason berries sink in a butter cake is because there is plenty of room underneath them in a standard cake pan. In a shallower pan, there’s no place to fall.
A 10-inch tart pan worked perfectly. The berries stayed on top of the batter, collapsing only minimally and retaining their color and shape. And the cake surrounding them was still soft and velvety.
Because I’d envisioned this cake as the finale to a Fourth of July barbecue, I formed the berries into patriotic strawberry, raspberry and blueberry stripes, adding a sprinkle of confectioners’ sugar and a dollop of whipped cream, the white to go with all that red and blue.
But feel free to lay your berries in any shape you like — stars, smiley faces, rhombuses. Other fruit works well, too, if you’ve got plums or nectarines instead of berries.
Then be sure to serve this cake on the same day that it’s baked. Leftovers will make for a rather soggy breakfast the next day. And that is a sad cake moment you ought to avoid.
Recipes: Buckwheat Berry Striped Cake | Fourth of July

