For decades, the southwest corner of 57th Street and Fifth Avenue was Bill Cunningham's main perch.
Over the years, he had gone everywhere in the city one of his 30 bicycles would take him. Up to the Botanical Garden, down to the Christopher Street piers and over to Tompkins Square Park.
But Fifth Avenue remained for him the greatest place in the world, an intersection where East met West, uptown met downtown, publishing types in pencil skirts met Chanel-clad socialites, and black met white.
Mr. Cunningham loved himself a parade, the bulk of which seemed to take place there. That's where Puerto Ricans headed the second week in June, decked out in red, white, blue and everything in between. A few weeks later, he'd head back for the gay pride parade.
He never seemed to miss St. Patrick's Day, when he could be spotted amid the sea of white and green wearing his trademark uniform — a blue French worker's jacket, his khaki-colored pants and black sneakers.
So when Mr. Cunningham died Saturday after becoming an actual living landmark, it made sense that this was where mourners headed, right by the windows at Bergdorf Goodman, where the store installed a special display in his honor, showcasing a bicycle, a black Nikon camera and a background painted what the store's longtime style maven, Linda Fargo, described as “Bill Cunningham blue.” On the curb, some put up white flowers. Others left notes.
During his later years, people told him how much they admired him, and how they read his columns religiously and devoured the documentary about him. “I think it embarrassed him,” his friend Cecilia Dean said. “He was unbelievably gracious, but you could tell how uncomfortable he was with it.”
Now he is gone, and they are still paying tribute.
There's a petition at Change.org to designate the location “Bill Cunningham Corner.” It's already received more than 3,200 signatures. According to WWD, the designer Jeffrey Banks has started another campaign to get a sculpture of Mr. Cunningham placed on the corner.
On Thursday, a private funeral will be held, with a memorial expected in the coming weeks. This Sunday, The New York Times Styles section will pay tribute to a man who never would have asked for it, but whom so many want to honor nevertheless.

