ATLANTA — A team's place in the standings can drift from week to week, especially in the fickle and forgiving National League East. Seven days ago, the Mets trailed the division-leading Washington Nationals by five and a half games. The offense was concerning, and more injuries would pile up.
The Mets' offense remains dysfunctional, yet their standing in the division has improved — even after a 5-2 loss Sunday to the Atlanta Braves. Despite their bumpy June, the Mets trail the Nationals by only three games going into a three-game series that begins Monday in Washington.
“It's a tremendous situation,” Manager Terry Collins said. “We're very fortunate to be in it. That's what we keep telling these guys. As we try to get better and we try to get our health better and get some guys going who aren't hitting right now, hey, look, we're two games back in the loss column. We'll take it.”
The Mets' pitching staff has carried the team, and it did so again Sunday until a late-game collapse by the bullpen. In his first start since injuring the thumb on his throwing hand, Bartolo Colon showed no ill effects. He allowed only one run — a solo home run by Freddie Freeman — over seven strong innings.
Colon, who lowered his E.R.A. to 2.86, said his thumb did not bother him.
“Outstanding,” Collins said. “He pitched great.”
But the Mets' hitters hardly provided much support. Collins decided that two veteran regulars — right fielder Curtis Granderson and shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera — needed rest.
Instead, the rookie Matt Reynolds started at shortstop, and the outfield prospect Brandon Nimmo made his major league debut in right field. Reynolds went 1 for 4 and struck out twice. Nimmo, who finished 0 for 4, flashed some of his speed — on groundouts. He said his nerves subsided after the first pitch of his first at-bat.
“It was a very surreal feeling,” he said. “I had fun. I just wish it would have ended up differently. I could have come through a couple times for us. But you know, first game out of the way, hopefully can help out a little better down the road.”
Nimmo's fiancée, sister and parents arrived from his native Wyoming in time to watch Sunday's game from the stands.
“That's something pretty special to be able to share with the family,” Nimmo said.
The Nimmo family saw a typical showing from the Mets: solid pitching, not much hitting. The Mets rank near the bottom in the majors in many offensive categories.
“It's not as bad as it looks on the outside,” infielder Wilmer Flores said. “It's something small, a little click. Sometimes this happens and it's the entire team. But it's a small change, and any moment, everyone can wake up.”
The Mets squandered scoring chances against Braves starter Bud Norris, who carried a 4.69 E.R.A. into the game. Kelly Johnson notched a leadoff single in the sixth inning and stole a base, an element of the game the Mets have rarely used this season. Batters at the top of the order struck out, flied out and grounded out, leaving Johnson at second.
“We've just got to be, as a team through the lineup, more scrappy,” Johnson said. “That's kind of a good word. Fighting off pitches and finding a way to get on, whether it's a walk or base hits.”
Trailing by only one run, the Mets still had a chance to rally entering the eighth inning. Collins sent in the left-handed reliever Antonio Bastardo. He faced three batters and allowed two singles and a walk. He allowed a run and was charged with a balk.
Bastardo's replacement, Logan Verrett, gave up a three-run home run to the first batter he faced, Adonis Garcia. Bastardo's E.R.A. shot up to 5.46. The Mets added two runs in the ninth inning. They have dropped five of their past seven games against the Braves.
And now they will face the Nationals, followed by the best team in baseball, the Chicago Cubs, and the Miami Marlins and the Nationals again.
“The worst-case scenario going into the All-Star break is don't lose any more ground,” Collins said. “Heading into the next 14 days, we've got a lot of work ahead of us.”

