Federal prosecutors will not file charges against three police officers in Pasco, Wash., who shot and killed a mentally ill man last year, sparking weeks of protests. United States Attorney Michael Ormsby said Tuesday that there was insufficient evidence that the officers violated the civil rights of the man, Antonio Zambrano-Montes, when they fired 17 bullets at him on Feb. 10, 2015. Mr. Zambrano-Montes, 35, an orchard worker from Mexico, was shot as he threw rocks at the police at a busy downtown intersection. An autopsy showed he had methamphetamine in his system. He also had a history of mental illness and previous interactions with the police. Local prosecutors had previously cleared the officers, Adrian Alaniz, Ryan Flanagan, and Adam Wright. “When he then turned to surrender, they shot him to death,” Mr. Zambrano-Montes’s mother, Agapita Montes Rivera, of Parotita, Mexico, said in the statement. “Where is justice for my son?” she said. The parents have filed a lawsuit in federal court contending the officers used excessive force. (AP)
Two 25-year-old men were convicted Tuesday of trying to become fighters for the Islamic State. Nader Elhuzayel and Muhanad Badawi, both of Anaheim, Calif., schemed last year for Mr. Elhuzayel to fly to the Middle East to fight for the Islamic State, federal officials said. Mr. Badawi, a college engineering student, also was convicted of aiding and abetting an attempt to provide support for terrorists and financial aid fraud. Authorities say he used a federal college grant to support the cause. Mr. Elhuzayel also was convicted of 26 counts of bank fraud. Federal officials said he deposited stolen checks in his bank accounts and withdrew money, intending to use the cash to fight in Syria. The F.B.I. said the men shared their support for the Islamic State in conversation and on social media. Their lawyers say their comments were offensive but not criminal. Mr. Badawi’s lawyer said he never actually intended to fight for the Islamic State but “was a lot of talk and absolutely no action.” (AP)

