When a pair of much-loved underwear starts sprouting holes, most people throw them in the trash. But for the London-based designer Marie Yeung, it was a pair of tattered undergarments that inspired her to start an underwear line, Marieyat, last year. “I was over at my friend Gwyneth's house, and she was doing what girls do — showing each other clothes, putting on outfits, taking them off, putting them on again,” recalls Yeung. “I see that she is wearing a pair of underwear, made of a really sheer delicate fabric and that the binding has ripped, because they're falling apart and because she just wears them at home, and obviously doesn't care. The binding was so perfectly cut, just under the butt cheek. And I realized, this is actually appealing in a really weird way.”
Yeung, a Central Saint Martins graduate, had already been thinking about starting an underwear line for a few months. “I wanted to create some that is quite comfortable but still really sexy,” she says. She'd already gotten in touch with a factory in her hometown Hong Kong that specialized in producing seamless underwear. “I wanted to make something seamless, but I didn't want it to be just a basic brief,” Yeung says. In her friend's ripped underwear, she'd found the design tweak she was looking for: “I thought, why not try to replicate this but in cotton rib?” she says.
The G-Tang — named for the friend that inspired it — is now the brand's signature style: a cotton rib panty with a binding that hits just below the butt cheek. The rest of the collection — high-waisted and medium-rise underwear, bras, bodysuits and crop tops with cutouts and color-block paneling — continues the thread: comfortable, mostly machine-washable (save for a handful of silk items) and just a little subversive. Nearly all of the garments are crafted from a soft cotton rib — one of Yeung's favorite fabrics. “The material I'm using is very forgiving,” she says. “It's very stretchy, and just sits on your skin so your body looks like whatever your body looks like without it on. It doesn't change anything. It's not Spanx.” The fabric's versatility allows for simplified sizing: The brand offers four sizes, from extra-small to large. (Soon, Yeung hopes to offer extra-large.)
“We've been educated for so long on how our body is supposed to look like, I think it's time to show that actually we all look different,” she says. Yeung adds that, as a consumer, she has never connected with the way most lingerie companies market their products. “When I put it on, I didn't quite feel like myself because the way they were selling it felt so unreal,” she says. She adds of the decision behind Marieyet: “We always try to tell a story about friendship in our brand imagery.”
Needless to say, Yeung will not be shilling her wares with a promise of perfection. In fact, quite the opposite. “I'm attracted to imperfections,” she says. “The whole collection was inspired, in a way, by that — it's inspired by broken pieces, and by the idea of deconstructing a garment, something I've always been interested in.” For her latest collection, which debuts exclusively in T, Yeung explored that idea in a new way: In addition to deconstructed garments like the G-Tang, many items are embroidered with a cracked golden line, inspired by Kintsugi, the Japanese practice of mending broken pottery with gold. According to the philosophy behind Kintsugi, the piece becomes even more beautiful for having been broken; flaws, therefore, should be celebrated rather than hidden. It's a fitting reference for an underwear brand that's as likely to be shown off as it is covered. Says Yeung: “Even if you're not wearing it to show people, if you're wearing a piece that makes you feel good, it can make your day.”

