NOCHIXTLÁN, Mexico — The battle over education here has suddenly turned literal.
Violent protests have claimed the lives of at least nine people in little more than a week, littered the roads with the charred remains of cargo trucks, and tapped a deep vein of anger and mistrust toward the government.
Thousands of students here in the southern state of Oaxaca have been without school for months as their teachers have taken to the streets, rejecting national efforts to improve the enormous, abysmal education system.
But after government forces clashed with demonstrators here in the town of Nochixtlán last week, leaving at least nine dead and dozens wounded, the protest movement appears to have gained steam, plunging President Enrique Peña Nieto's signature education changes deeper into controversy.
In recent days, thousands of students in Oaxaca have joined their teachers in the streets for the first time to rail against the government, and many adults once ambivalent about the teachers' cries of injustice have also taken up the cause.
“Before, we weren't supporting either side,” said Karen Hernández Casares, 15, a student in Oaxaca City who was among thousands of fellow students dressed in school uniforms and carrying posters denouncing the education overhaul. “But we can't stand by and allow government repression.”
“Everything has changed now,” she added.
The violence touched a raw nerve in Oaxaca, which, despite a thriving tourism industry, is one of the poorest and most volatile states in the country. The government's response to the protests has amplified a belief that the education reforms are just the latest effort by Mexico City to marginalize the people here and deprive them of their rights and dignity.
In most of the country, the president's push to revamp the schools has found broad acceptance. Government officials and supporters of the overhaul point out that the resistance has been almost entirely concentrated in four southern states, especially Oaxaca, and involves only a small fraction of the nation's education employees.
Even many of the president's opponents agree that the nation's public education system — the world's fifth largest, with more than 30 million students — is in dire need of repair.
It has long been one of the worst-performing public education systems of the world's largest economic powers. According to a January 2015 report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Mexico's academic achievement ranked last among the group's 34 member states.
Mexico's schools have suffered from wasteful spending and a bloated bureaucracy that for years was heavily influenced, if not outright controlled in places, by the powerful national teachers' union. With about 1.6 million members, it is the largest public union in Latin America.
“The state governments were prisoners of the local sections of the union,” said Carlos Ornelas, a professor of education and communications at the Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana in Mexico City.
The system has been riddled with favoritism and graft. A recent census of the public education system — the first the government had ever conducted, officials said — found thousands of ghost employees on the payroll and many more former employees who had quit, retired or died but were still being issued paychecks.
Graduates of teaching colleges were given guarantees of lifelong employment regardless of performance, and posts were passed along as inheritances or bought and sold on the open market.
After taking office in 2012, Mr. Peña Nieto made education a priority, quickly passing a package of changes that were in part designed to break the union's stranglehold on the system.
The changes instituted teacher evaluations and a competitive hiring process. They also restructured the school bureaucracy, returning more control to the federal government, and enacted a new salary payment system intended to protect against graft and wasteful spending.
While the national union has fallen in line behind the government's efforts, a dissident wing of the union continued to resist the changes, staging major demonstrations like the recent uprisings in Oaxaca.
Though that wing, called the National Coordinator of Education Workers, has a presence throughout the country, its stronghold is in the poorer, southern reaches, especially Oaxaca, where it has dominated the school system, government officials and analysts say.
The group's leaders say they are most opposed to the new teacher evaluations, which require that all teachers pass an assessment test every few years. Teachers are given three attempts to pass, each one separated by a year of training. If they fail three times in a row, they are removed from their teaching jobs and reassigned to an administrative post.
“The exams have one intention,” said Gabriel López Chiñas, a teacher who recently served as a top official for the dissident wing in Oaxaca. “They seek to fire teachers. They don't seek to improve the quality of education.”
Last year, as part of the overhaul, the state and federal governments dismantled the state education department of Oaxaca, which was dominated by union members, and reconstituted it with new leadership under the control of the state. Two weeks ago, the authorities arrested and imprisoned the top two leaders of the Oaxacan section of the union on corruption allegations.
Support for the dissident union wing in Oaxaca and its other traditional strongholds in Chiapas, Michoacán and Guerrero had seemed to be waning, officials and analysts said.
But then the deadly clash with security forces inflamed widespread antipathy toward Mr. Peña Nieto, who is facing low approval ratings amid soaring doubts about his administration's ability to fight corruption and crime, including solving the case of the disappearance of 43 college students.
Last week, the administration met with the dissident wing of the national teachers' union, widely viewed as a capitulation. A second meeting was scheduled for Monday. The government has maintained its long-held position that it will not negotiate the new laws, and that the mandated overhaul is inevitable in Oaxaca and other southern states where resistance is high.
Juan Díaz de la Torre, the head of the national teachers' union, has staunchly backed the government's position against the dissident union members. “If we violate the law because of this circumstance, we will fall into a spiral that won't help anyone,” he said in an interview on Thursday. “We want to see ourselves in the mirror of the most developed countries. We want to see ourselves there. We don't want to go down again. We want to keep improving.”
The blockades and protests have increased in Oaxaca since the violence on June 19, and some residents dread more bloodshed. Along the streets here in the center of Nochixtlán, most of the stores were closed this past week, their metal security gates pulled down and locked.
“There's a panic right now in town because of this confrontation,” said Eric CoCa Hernández, 31, who opened his shoe store despite a dearth of customers.
He said many non-teachers from elsewhere in the country had joined the teachers at the barricades, adding a shadowy element to the protests.
“We don't know whether they are here to help the teachers or for other reasons,” he said.
The authorities have speculated that armed members of radical antigovernment groups infiltrated the ranks of protesting teachers and fired on federal officers on June 19, provoking a firefight. The shootings are under investigation.
On the outskirts of the town this past week, young men with bandannas covering their faces patrolled blockades, stopping and searching cars at random. They told motorists that they were looking for employees of the federal government.
Not everyone, however, joined with the teachers to denounce the government. Some felt that, amid the violence, the central issue of students' education had been lost, and a few held the teachers responsible for the violence and for failing to educate children. In the past seven years, teacher strikes in Oaxaca have closed schools for the equivalent of a full school year, according to government figures.
“Right now, everyone is washing their hands of responsibility and blaming the government,” said María Martina García, 55, a maid. “But I blame the teachers. I want to be rid of them.”
Alongside her daughter and three grandchildren, who have been biding their time at home since mid-May, she came to a memorial service on Tuesday in the center of Nochixtlán for Jesús Cárdenas, 19, who was killed in the clashes.
“Every year this happens,” her daughter, Sulema Rivera, said of the teacher protests. “My children have rights, too — the right to be in school.”
The next day, students congregated to support the teachers. Thousands poured into Oaxaca City, where the charming town center has become a makeshift camp of battered tarps and tents for protesting teachers. Their chants and signs alternated between support for the teachers and denouncements of the government.
The march wound through a cluster of impromptu stalls hawking the likes of cheese and hand-embroidered shirts. The wait staff at the fancy restaurants flanking the central square did not even bother trying to solicit customers. The cafes, in a rare exception to the general tumult, were dormant.
The energy was instead among those marching.
“If you can read this sign, it is thanks to my teachers,” read one poster.

