WASHINGTON — Despite the inconsistencies of his season, the Mets needed Matt Harvey to be his old self Tuesday against their division rival Washington Nationals. The Mets had lost two straight games. The starting rotation, the backbone of the team, was dinged up like other parts of the team.
Then the rain came.
While an improved Harvey was facing Danny Espinosa in the bottom of the fourth inning of a one-run game, umpires sent both teams into their clubhouses because of a heavy thunderstorm. Once the hour-and-25-minute delay was over, the Mets were forced to cobble together the rest of the game with the bullpen, which stumbled in a 5-0 loss.
“I'm sure he'll say it: This is the best he's felt all year,” Manager Terry Collins said of Harvey. “That's why it's a really tough night not to be able to stay out there and pitch a little bit.”
Previously stellar this season, Jerry Blevins allowed a two-run home run to Bryce Harper in the fifth inning. Blevins mistakenly fired a fastball over the middle of the strike zone, and Harper smashed it into the home bullpen in right field. It was the first home run that Blevins had surrendered to a left-handed batter since 2013, and it gave the Nationals a 3-0 lead.
The game started an hour late because of rain. After the delay in the fourth, the Mets finished the game piecemeal, with four relievers. That wasn't Harvey's fault; the weather simply had other plans. The game also started an hour late because of rain.
Harvey's season has been a battle to find steadiness. He has said after starts that his mechanics have not been right, and then thinking about them during games hasn't helped either.
Harvey looked better at times on Tuesday, his slider sharper than before. He allowed one run on four hits and walked three batters in three and two-thirds innings, but he looked more comfortable.
“Anytime is a good time,” Harvey said. “Obviously didn't want to keep going the way I was. But it's nice to be a little better.”
Because of the long delay in the fourth inning, Harvey could not return to the mound. He wound up charged with the loss, leaving him 4-10 with a 4.55 earned run average.
“You work so hard all year to finally figure some stuff out, and Mother Nature takes over there,” Harvey said.
The Nationals, too, lost their starter after the rain. Lucas Giolito, one of the top pitching prospects in baseball, made his major league debut on Tuesday. A 21-year-old hard thrower, he allowed only one hit and two walks.
Mets right fielder Curtis Granderson reached base twice against Giolito. But even he could not escape the rash of injuries that have destabilized the Mets.
Granderson did not return after the second rain delay because he could not loosen his right calf, which first felt tight over the weekend. He was replaced by Alejandro De Aza.
In the seventh inning, the Mets were dealt another injury scare. A line drive by Ryan Zimmerman measured at 110 miles per hour struck Mets reliever Hansel Robles's right leg. He crumpled to the ground but walked off the field under his own power.
Before a ball hit his leg, Robles coughed up two runs, giving the Nationals a five-run lead, too large for the Mets' stagnant offense to overcome.
The Mets advanced a runner to third base only once, in the sixth inning, when Asdrubal Cabrera doubled and Yoenis Cespedes followed with a single. Neil Walker's walk loaded the bases, but the Nationals reliever Oliver Perez, once a Met, was brought in to escape the jam, which he did, with a strikeout and a flyout.
The rain-soaked game ended after midnight, and the Nationals could wrap up a sweep on Wednesday. The Mets are five games behind Washington in the National League East.
INSIDE PITCH
General Manager Sandy Alderson said the Mets were impressed by Yulieski Gourriel, the free-agent third baseman from Cuba who worked out for the Mets in Port St. Lucie, Fla., on Monday. Gourriel took batting practice, ran the bases and took grounders at second and third. He will continue to hold showcases for other interested teams and could be ready for the majors in a month. ... First baseman Lucas Duda, who has been out since May 21 with a stress fracture in his lower back, is still two weeks away from resuming baseball activities.

