At the Grand at Sky View Parc, a luxury condominium development in Flushing, Queens, there are a health club, a pool and a children's play area, among other amenities, but no laundry room. That's because the developer, Onex Real Estate Partners, has outfitted each apartment with a washer and dryer, eliminating the need for common laundry facilities.
Abington House, a rental property in Chelsea developed by the Related Companies, also doesn't have a common laundry room; washers and dryers are tucked into even its smallest studio apartments. And at the developer's new condominium 70 Vestry in TriBeCa, each apartment will have two washers and dryers. So it's no surprise that there's no common laundry area. Convenience, it seems, is in; chatting with fellow residents while folding clean clothes is out.
But the laundry room isn't the only old-school amenity that is vanishing from New York City apartment buildings, according to developers and building owners and managers. A number of features that were once considered standard in the city's residential buildings are declining in size and importance, or being phased out altogether, in favor of luxuries like private laundry facilities — or wine cellars or tween rooms — in an effort by developers to attract and retain residents.
Long relied on by working parents, ravenous teens and anyone with a cup of coffee that's gone cold, microwaves are essential in many New York homes. Of course, they have their limitations (not the least of which are soggy French fries). And many people have never quite understood, or trusted, how they worked.
Now there's something that's being touted as an improvement: the speed oven. As its name suggests, it cooks faster than a conventional oven — roasting a whole chicken in 20 minutes, for example, by ramping up convection heat with an assist from microwave technology. And some speed ovens have a browning setting (for things like French fries) as well as a microwave mode.
“It's the quintessential urban appliance,” said Andrew Bradfield, the principal of Orange Management, a development company. “New Yorkers don't want to sacrifice taste for convenience — they want both.” Mr. Bradfield's company is putting stainless-steel Bosch speed ovens in some units in the Waverly Brooklyn, a condominium under construction in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn.
Speed ovens from Bertazzoni will be installed in the Clodagh-designed kitchens at Citizen360, a condominium developed by Anbau that just topped out in the Yorkville neighborhood of Manhattan. And at 505W19, a property abutting the High Line by the HFZ Capital Group, the kitchens include Miele speed ovens, in addition to the conventional ovens, double burners, wok burners and warming drawers. But there won't be any microwaves.
After Fresh Direct took New York by storm in 2002, the real estate industry fell in line, with many developers and building owners creating refrigerated rooms to accommodate the avalanche of cardboard boxes that arrived every night. But now that the company offers more delivery “windows” and customers can coordinate the arrival of their groceries with their schedules, the so-called Fresh Direct room “hardly ever gets used,” said Marc Kotler, a senior vice president of the new development group at FirstService Residential. The cold storage in the properties his company manages is now mostly empty, he said, but “it's a great place for the doorman to store his lunch.”
In some buildings, a single refrigerator may suffice for the few deliveries that need to be stored cold, like flowers or prescription drugs. In others, refrigerated storage is being incorporated into the larger package rooms designed to deal with the real problem facing buildings these days: the daily pileup of boxes from Amazon and Zappos.
In the 1990s, large buildings sometimes had business centers with videoconferencing capabilities, so residents could hold virtual meetings with colleagues in distant locations. Then came Skype and FaceTime. Today, those conference rooms are no longer a necessity, said Bryan Cho, an executive vice president of the Related Companies.
The movie rooms that some buildings included in amenities packages are also rarely used; some building managers found they were never that popular, said Andrew Barrocas, the chief executive of the real estate firm MNS.
So these single-purpose rooms are being supplanted by multipurpose lounges, which often have a large flat-screen television or a pull-down screen. One resident might use the space for a meeting; someone else might hold a cocktail party there. And anyone who works from home can take a laptop to the lounge for a change of scenery.
Large apartments in New York City have long been equipped with their own washers and dryers — and the largest have full-fledged laundry rooms that rival those in suburbia. For the rest of the city's high-rise population, there was the common laundry room, where residents could peruse reading material left behind by their neighbors and trade gossip while waiting for their clothes to dry.
But as washers and dryers got smaller and more efficient — some of them ventless and even merging washing and drying functions in a single unit — New Yorkers began shoehorning the appliances into their linen closets and under kitchen counters. And for many developers, in-home washers and dryers became the new norm.
Of course, common laundry rooms still exist in older buildings, and even new buildings with in-unit washers and dryers often have a basement laundry room with a couple of industrial-size machines to accommodate large loads like comforters or sleeping bags. But as a rule, the common laundry facility is becoming scarce, or a lot smaller.
When Anbau guts an old rental building during a condo conversion, the company usually replaces the basement laundry room with one about half the size of the old one. “The big prewars might have had eight washers and eight dryers,” said Barbara van Beuren, the managing director of acquisitions, design and marketing at Anbau. “We'll put in two or three of each.”
Leave it to Frank Gehry to buck the trend. New York by Gehry, the rental building at 8 Spruce Street that he designed, counts a standard laundry room among its amenities, even though every apartment has its own washer and dryer. And on a recent afternoon, most of the eight washers and eight dryers seemed to be in use.
The laundry room's location, just steps from the golf simulators, probably didn't hurt. More than one resident has surely fit in a few holes before moving a load of towels from the washer to the dryer.

