With a hot tea in his hand and his yellow cab parked on East 28th Street, Samkar Padder savored a break from the Manhattan streets he has driven on for more than 16 years.
Like other independent drivers, Mr. Padder, 42, decides when he needs a break, whether it is for coffee, a restroom stop or a little fresh air.
The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, concerned about driver fatigue, wants a bigger say in how long and how often breaks should be, and on Thursday, drivers turned out by the dozens to denounce the proposed rules.
Appearing at the commission’s monthly meeting in Lower Manhattan, drivers said new limitations would cut into their income and pile on more restrictions in an industry that was already heavily regulated.
Taxi drivers are currently limited to shifts of 12 hours, which are common in the industry. A break of any length, like Mr. Padder’s tea stop, resets that clock.
“I know how to take a rest when I need it,” said James Rahming, 51, a taxi driver. “For me to stay awake at least 15 hours, my body is used to it. It sounds like a lot, but it goes by quickly.”
The proposed rules, which are to be voted on at the commission’s next meeting, on July 18, would apply not only to taxi drivers but also to all for-hire drivers, including ones for services like Uber. The rules would, among other changes, limit them to 12 hours per day of transporting passengers.
At the hearing, Meera Joshi, the commission’s chairwoman, said that the proposals were based on a review of best practices and an analysis of data, and that they were essential to ensuring passenger safety. “Service without safety standards is actually a disservice to drivers, passengers and the public,” she said.
Driver fatigue has long been a concern for people who drive for a living, whether trucks, buses or taxis, though New York City’s rules for cabbies have been relatively permissive. But momentum for tightening the rules has been building since Luisa Rosario, 88, was killed last year in Manhattan in a crash involving a taxi driver who had been on the road for 16 hours with minimal breaks. Ramon Henriquez, a relative of Ms. Rosario, endorsed the proposed restrictions at the hearing.
“I want changes in the laws because our family has suffered,” he said in an interview. “This is happening daily. After 12 hours working, a person is exhausted.”
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says being awake for 18 hours results in impairment equal to blood-alcohol concentrations of 0.05, which is considered driving while under the influence in the state. Being awake for 24 hours is equal to a concentration of 0.10, above the 0.08 legal limit.
Under the proposed rules, drivers would also be prohibited from picking up passengers for more than 72 hours a week. A base could not dispatch a driver for more than 12 hours a day. Drivers would be responsible for tracking their hours.
“This is an injustice,” Mr. Padder said. “Without 14 hours, you can’t make $400 a day. Without that money, I cannot feed my family.”
Most drivers do not work such long shifts, the commission said in its notice for the public hearing. Three percent of drivers for hire in the city typically drive for more than 12 hours per day, and less than 7 percent drive for more than 72 hours per week.
Data gathered by the commission shows that in 2014 and 2015, the crash rate of taxi drivers working more than 12 hours was 23.8 percent higher than that of drivers working 12 or fewer hours. The crash rate of taxi drivers who worked 72 hours or more in a week was 8.6 percent higher than for those who worked 72 hours or fewer.
Drivers said the new rules were symptomatic of the problems facing an industry struggling to compete with app-based services while also wrestling with new efforts to regulate for-hire vehicles.
Sergio Cabrera, 53, said he was often in his cab 18 hours a day. Like a majority of drivers, he is not driving the entire time; he estimates he is actually transporting passengers for 10 hours, below the proposed limit.
“It really doesn’t change anything,” he said of the proposed rules.

