Monday morning, the United States Supreme Court struck down parts of a Texas law that would have significantly reduced the number of abortion clinics in the state. Emily Bazelon, a staff writer for the magazine; Eric Posner, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School; and William Baude, an assistant professor at the University of Chicago Law School, have been exchanging emails about the meaning and impact of the court's decision.
Hi Eric, Will,
The crucial, even monumental, import of the Supreme Court's 5-3 abortion ruling Monday is its focus on women — their health, well-being and ability to access a constitutional right. Maybe that sounds obvious, but in many of the court's previous rulings on this subject, it has been anything but. Justice Stephen Breyer's opinion for the majority delivers an ingredient that's been missing for 25 years: a definitive statement of what it means for a state to impose an “undue burden” on the right to abortion, by placing a “substantial obstacle” in the path of a woman seeking one. The court established the “undue burden” standard in 1992, but what the test meant appeared to shift over time, until it was close to shapeless. Now the court has issued a clear answer, which gives proper weight to medical expertise and scientific evidence — and respects women and the choices they make. That's monumental, too.
The court was considering new rules, passed in 2013 by the Texas Legislature, requiring abortion clinics to employ a doctor who has privileges to admit patients at a nearby hospital and to meet the construction and equipment standards for an “ambulatory surgical center,” which include temperature controls, hallways wide enough for a gurney and special ventilation units. (The estimated cost of renovating an existing clinic is $1.5 million to $3 million.) If the Texas restrictions were allowed to go fully into effect, the plaintiffs who challenged the law showed, the number of clinics in Texas was projected to drop to eight or nine, from 44 three years ago, across nearly 270,000 square miles. More than 20 states have enacted laws with some or all of the Texas restrictions, so this case had sweeping implications.
“We conclude that neither of these provisions offers benefits sufficient to justify the burdens upon access that each imposes,” Breyer wrote in an opinion joined by the court's three other liberals — Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan — and the swing voter Justice Anthony Kennedy. So this is what “undue burden” means: a safety precaution that does more harm than good, measured in terms of preventing a woman from having an abortion versus protecting her health. The test for the court, in assessing Texas' regulations, is whether they make women safer, compared with the previous rules.
The answer, the evidence presented in the lower court showed, is no. Before doctors had to get admitting privileges, they had to show they had a working arrangement with a hospital to care for a patient with complications. When asked at argument for a single instance in which admitting privileges “would have helped even one woman obtain better treatment, Texas admitted that there was no evidence in the record of such a case,” Breyer writes. Yet when the state began enforcing the admitting-privilege rule, the number of clinics in the state dropped to about 20 from about 40. (Abortion providers often don't qualify for the privileges because their rates of complications are too low for regular admissions of patients.)
The surgical-center rules are similarly useless. The record showed “that abortions taking place in an abortion facility are safe,” Breyer writes — “indeed safer” than many outpatient procedures for which Texas had no analogous rules. Among the riskier procedures the state didn't similarly regulate: home births, colonoscopies, liposuction and (from Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg's concurring opinion) tonsillectomies and dental surgery. The state singled out abortion for regulation to discourage it. As clinics shut, more women had to travel 100 or 200 miles to reach a clinic. That hit poor women hardest. The balancing test Breyer lays out — burdens to access weighed against benefits to health — makes clear why forcing women to travel long distances can be a violation of the Constitution.
This is the first majority opinion in an abortion case by a liberal justice in 16 years. It's striking to read a Supreme Court majority opinion about abortion that expresses empathy for women going through the procedure. (Breyer wrote then, in the case in Stenberg v. Carhart, to strike down a law against one kind of late-term abortion procedure. That decision was effectively, though not explicitly, overturned seven years later when Justice Kennedy joined the conservatives in Gonzales v. Carhart.) Now Breyer takes the point of view of women in describing how the regulations would force big and sterile abortion clinics to take the place of smaller and homier ones, because of the attendant costs. “In the fact of no threat to women's health, Texas seeks to force women to travel long distances to get abortions in crammed-to-capacity superfacilities,” he writes. “Patients seeking these services are less likely to get the kind of individualized attention, serious conversation and emotional support that doctors at less taxed facilities may have offered.” He is talking about the psychological components of good medical care. And he's taking it for granted that women seeking abortions deserve it.
In other major cases this term and last, the court's four liberals have voted as a bloc and refrained from adding separate concurring opinions, in a further show of solidarity. This time, however, Justice Ginsburg wrote for herself, and I'm glad to hear her voice. “It is beyond rational belief” that Texas' abortion regulations “could genuinely protect the health of women,” she writes. “When a state severely limits access to safe and legal procedures, women in desperate circumstances may resort to unlicensed rogue practitioners, faute de mieux, at great risk to their health and safety.” The French phrase means “for want of a better alternative.” Ginsburg is summoning the dangerous back-alley procedures of the past and the uncertain online abortion-drug market of the present. And she's also banishing those images, by underscoring the welcome effect of today's decision: It will help women take care of themselves.
Emily
Hi Will, Emily,
I agree with Emily. You'd need to live in a different universe to believe that the Texas Legislature sought to advance women's health with this law. It sought to limit abortion by pretending to be concerned about the health of the women who seek abortions. The court was right to invalidate this cynical stunt.
Yet I think Justice Clarence Thomas makes a good point in his dissent, where he contrasts this case with Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. As I pointed out in my first post, the court upheld U.T.'s affirmative-action program last week despite the absence of firm social-scientific evidence that affirmative action advances educational outcomes. Now the court strikes down Texas' abortion law because of the absence of evidence that the law protects women's health. If the court wants to make sure that states act only when they have good reason to act, shouldn't it demand strong evidence in all cases? Why are the speculative benefits of affirmative action for educational outcomes sufficient to uphold an affirmative-action program, while the speculative benefits for women's health are insufficient for upholding Texas' law?
The explanation is simply this: The court's liberals care about abortion rights and not about the equal-protection concerns that animate opposition to affirmative action. For the conservatives, the opposite is true. Kennedy, not always a friend of abortion rights, came around to them in this case. Kennedy, who once seemed opposed to affirmative action, came around to it in Fisher. He truly swings from both sides of the batter's box. But increasingly from the left side.
This, even before Justice Antonin Scalia's death, was a big worry for conservatives. Thomas argues that the liberals, plus Kennedy, are manipulating the legal standards that the court has said it will use to evaluate the constitutionality of statutes and other government actions. He's right about this, though, of course, the conservative justices have done the same. Thomas — and Justice Samuel Alito in his separate dissent — put their objection in terms of legal values, arguing that the people can't plan their lives if the court is constantly changing the rules and using mushy legal standards that allow it to implement an ideological agenda.
But the truth is simpler. The tide has turned in the ideological battles on the court. Thomas sees this clearly. In his peroration, he drops the veil of legalism to lament the emergence of the modern liberal jurisprudence of constitutional rights, embodied in a footnote to a 1938 case called United States v. Carolene Products Co., which called on the court to protect “discrete and insular minorities.” This idea would inspire liberal justices to protect racial minorities, sexual minorities, poor people and women. A conservative backlash, which began in the 1970s, both cut back on these protections and advanced rights preferred by conservatives — above all, property rights and the right to own guns. The conservative counterrevolution, of which Thomas was a leading figure, at one time seemed unstoppable. It is now clear that it has run its course.
Eric
Hi Eric, Emily,
Eric makes a good point about consistency across cases — which laws deserve heightened judicial scrutiny is one of the core problems of constitutional law, and judges can claim legitimacy only if they have a consistent answer. But I think it is too soon to declare that the “conservative counterrevolution” (not my favored term) is over. The Supreme Court upheld Roe v. Wade against a major attack in 1992. It upheld affirmative action against an attack in 2003. But each time, only a few years later, court watchers were once again wringing their hands about a conservative revolution on the court. This year's decisions on abortion and affirmative action are a repeat of 1992 and 2003. Conservatives survived those years, and they will survive this one.
Justice Thomas probably knows this the best of anyone. This year and last year, he has written an astonishing number of separate opinions — 57 total.
He isn't writing those opinions for the short term. He is writing for the long term.
I'm also interested in the last decision of the term — McDonnell v. United States, which asked whether Bob McDonnell, the former governor of Virginia, committed a federal felony when he arranged meetings, hosted events and made phone calls on behalf of constituents who'd given him gifts. In an opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts Jr., the court said “no.”
The various charges against McDonnell all required the court to interpret the federal bribery statute's definition of “official act,” to decide whether the meetings, events and calls McDonnell made were enough to convert the gifts into bribes. The government dwelled extensively on the unseemliness of McDonnell's conduct and argued that the definition of “official act” should be interpreted very broadly.
The opinion rejecting that broad interpretation has several of the chief justice's hallmarks: It is unanimous; it is fun to read; and it sounds like common sense as it rejects an expansive government reading of the law. In the chief justice's hands, the case turns away from the question of whether McDonnell was corrupt (as the opinion puts it, “our concern is not with tawdry tales of Ferraris, Rolexes and ball gowns”). Instead, the question is whether “question, matter, cause, suit, proceeding or controversy” — part of the statutory definition of “official act” — can really include, well, everything. Having framed the question that way, the chief justice finds it easy to say that the broad interpretation is too broad.
In light of that interpretation, the opinion could have stopped there. Instead it goes on to invoke the “canon of constitutional avoidance,” which means that the court can suggest that the government's interpretation might have been unconstitutional without definitely saying so. It “avoids” a final constitutional ruling because the government ultimately loses on grounds of statutory interpretation. (The avoidance doctrine is another signature tool of the Roberts court.)
In any event, this constitutional-avoidance discussion gives the court the chance to comment on the potential vagueness of the statute, saying that it might delegate too much authority to federal prosecutors to decide which corruption cases to pursue. The court also says that the government's interpretation raises “federalism concerns,” because part of what makes a state “sovereign” is that it makes its own decisions about the “permissible scope of interactions between state officials and their constituents.” In this case, these concerns didn't matter very much because the court had other reasons to reject the government's broad interpretation, but they might be used to impose new limits on federal corruption prosecutions in the future. At a minimum, I suspect that white-collar criminal-defense lawyers are filing them away for their next cases.
If I had a wish, it would have been for the court to add to its opiniona more explicit discussion of the “rule of lenity,” which calls for criminal statutes to be narrowly construed. In this case and several others over the past few years, the court is plainly reaching to rein in what it sees as the excessive interpretation of federal criminal law. It would be nice to see the court be more explicit about its concerns and use the rule of lenity as a home for them. Doing so would give the lower courts more guidance about how to narrow criminal statutes themselves, rather than waiting for the occasional case to catch the court's eye.
Indeed, Justice Scalia was the court's greatest champion for the rule of lenity, and I especially missed his voice here. I don't doubt that he would have joined every other member of the court in invalidating the governor's convictions. But I suspect that he would have gone further, suggesting that the statute is irredeemably vague or setting forth an even stricter, lenity-based construction than the court's.
Will
Hi Emily, Will,
I'd like to say a few words about United States v. Texas, the immigration case decided last week. In a 4-4 tie, the court let stand the Fifth Circuit's decision upholding a preliminary injunction against President Obama's plan to defer enforcement against a group of unauthorized immigrants — roughly, the parents of American citizens and lawful permanent residents. The opinion was presented as a momentous political defeat for Obama, and maybe it was, but from a legal and practical perspective, there is much less than meets the eye.
You need to understand the state of affairs before Obama entered office. Millions of unauthorized immigrants lived in this country, as they had for decades. The current estimate is around 11 million. Congress has never appropriated sufficient funds to deport more than a tiny fraction of them — a few hundred thousand per year. Presidents have accordingly directed immigration authorities to deport unauthorized immigrants who are dangerous criminals and leave everyone else alone. Obama has continued this tradition, and the United States v. Texas ruling does not stop him from doing so.
Where Obama differed from his predecessors is that he tried to make a formal promise not to deport this group of unauthorized immigrants until he left office, just six months from now. But while the promise not to deport might have given beneficiaries some peace of mind, its practical effect was nil because the immigration authorities were not deporting them anyway.
Obama also sought to give them authorization to work. But just as the government under Obama and his predecessors did not try to deport nondangerous unauthorized immigrants, it also did not try to stop employers from hiring them, at least not very hard. Just read the government reports. In an average year, immigration authorities prosecute and convict only a few hundred people for hiring unauthorized workers. (They almost never deport workers caught in workplace raids.) Fines and sanctions against businesses that hire unauthorized immigrants amount to a few million dollars across the whole country every year, a rounding error for American businesses.
Because immigration authorities have never made a serious effort to stop employers from hiring unauthorized workers, Obama's plan would have had no meaningful impact. It just formalized the status quo. Its main effect would have been to save some businesses a trivial amount in fines. It might also have raised wages for beneficiaries slightly, as they would have been able to offer their services to a wider range of employers, including those that prefer not to break the law. However, this wage increase would have been offset by tax payments, which those now-authorized workers, no longer being paid off the books, would have had to make to the United States Treasury. The main beneficiary of Obama's plan was therefore the citizen taxpayer, who is also the main victim of the Supreme Court's decision. Our vast system of foreign labor, which exists because the public depends on it for cheap goods and services, will endure, whatever the courts hold. The Supreme Court, in the name of the rule of law, has sanctioned a corrupt system.
Eric
Hi Eric, Will,
I'm less sanguine, Eric, about the impact of the immigration ruling. You're right that most immigrants don't get deported and never will, no matter who is president. (Sorry, Donald Trump.) But betting you can stay in the country is different from knowing you can stay, even for a limited period of time. If Obama's promise had been carried out, it would have given millions of people a chance to breathe easier and plan their lives. They could also have hoped that the temporary respite of deportation relief would later turn into permanent residency. Obama's actions offered no guarantee, but it was the pot of gold on the horizon.
Also, I have to note that earlier in his presidency, Obama did not just focus on deporting dangerous criminals. There aren't that many of them. So the president got to a record number of deportations by deporting lots of other people. “Most of the growth in the number of deported immigrants has come from those deported for reasons other than a criminal conviction,” Ana Gonzalez-Barrera and Jens Manuel Krogstad wrote for the Pew Research Center two years ago. “In 2013, 240,000 deported immigrants did not have a previous criminal conviction.” The numbers from 2015, to be fair, are different. Almost 60 percent of those deported last year were previously convicted of a crime, and almost all of those without previous convictions (nearly 100,000 in total) were deported at or near the border.
At this point, with Obama's clock ticking, what really matters is the immigration policy of the next president. Hillary Clinton has promised to defend Obama's executive actions and push for a path to citizenship. Donald Trump's wants to build his wall. Their visions of the Supreme Court justices they would appoint, if they had the chance, are surely just as far apart.
That's why, as Will says, it's too soon to declare the court's conservative counterrevolution dead. The fight over filling the court's empty seat has turned this term into a weird and prolonged period of transition. It's hard for me to draw any conclusions about what this year's decisions mean for the Roberts court going forward. Did Justice Kennedy join the liberals on affirmative action and abortion because they're the future, and he wants to be on their team, or because the facts pulled him in their direction in these particular cases? When a new justice is confirmed, and the Roberts court, Part 2 opens, we'll begin to find out. And we'll start to learn whether Justice Thomas's lament is the song of this season or the beginning of a long cry of anguish.
In the meantime, thanks so much for talking all this through with me. You've been excellent company. And enlightening.
Emily

