WIMBLEDON, England — Garbiñe Muguruza insisted that nothing had changed.
Yes, she now has the label “Grand Slam champion” attached to her name after her victory in the French Open three weeks ago.
But her Wimbledon opener on Monday, against the 68th-ranked Camila Giorgi, is just another match, her season already reset for things to come.
“I just have a good feeling, you know, that I’m playing good, I won a lot of confidence,” Muguruza said at a news conference Saturday. “But nothing is really different.”
Muguruza, 22, did not have a lot of time to reflect on her victory in Paris. A week later, she was off to Majorca to play in the new grass-court event there, trying to make the difficult switch from clay to grass with little preparation.
She lost her first match but stayed in Majorca with her family for a few more days to train and relax.
It was then that she talked about her journey to her first major title: the matches, the rain, the fluky lob on match point of the final against Serena Williams.
Muguruza, seeded No. 2 at Wimbledon, said she was calm in the immediate aftermath of the French Open and was still calm now.
“I’ve been in the situation where you win a lot of matches, and then suddenly, you know, you lose,” she said.
She added: “I don’t take anything for granted. I’m going for the first match, like everyone else, from zero.”
In an era dominated by Williams, the past three Grand Slam tournaments have been won by women who gained their first major victories: Flavia Pennetta, Angelique Kerber and Muguruza.
Pennetta retired after winning the United States Open in September and was married this month to her fellow Italian player Fabio Fognini.
But Kerber, who defeated Williams in the Australian Open final in January, and Muguruza are under a new microscope.
Asked whether she sensed the Spanish news media would be more focused on her with Rafael Nadal out of the tournament, Muguruza made a face of mock horror and laughed.
“For sure, people with me are more looking at what I’m doing, will be more watching me,” she said. “But I think that’s fine. It’s a good sign. I like it. I’ll try to do my best.”
There is no doubt that being a Grand Slam champion produces new expectations. Kerber joked Saturday that it was the first time she had a pre-Wimbledon news conference in the main interview room.
After her victory in Melbourne, Kerber, 28, did not have much time to take it in. Her tournament schedule was intense.
In the course of five weeks in March and April, she reached the semifinals in Miami and Charleston, S.C., played in the Fed Cup for Germany and won the clay-court tournament in Stuttgart, Germany.
But the rest of her spring on clay was forgettable as she lost her first match in Madrid and again in both Rome and the French Open, where she was bothered by soreness in her left shoulder.
After her first-round loss in Paris, Kerber went home to Germany and rested. She did not watch much of the French Open and received treatment on her shoulder.
“That was good for me, like mentally, physically, everything, to get this time,” she said.
On Monday, Kerber, seeded fourth at Wimbledon and in Muguruza’s half of the draw, will play Laura Robson of Britain, a fellow left-hander.
Kerber, a semifinalist here in 2012, did acknowledge that things were different now that she was a Grand Slam champion.
“I’m trying to change still my game, trying to improve to be more aggressive,” she said. “Of course, after Australia, I know that I can beat everybody, also in the finals. This is what gives me a lot of more confidence.”
Muguruza, though, said it was stranger to be coming back to Wimbledon as last year’s runner-up than as this year’s French Open champion. That may have something to do with the fact that she is a clay-loving Spaniard.
“When I was younger, a lot of people were saying, ‘I think you will play good on grass,’ ” Muguruza said. “I’m like, ‘There’s no way, I hate grass. I’m horrible.’ ”
She was willing to accept the hypothesis that her aggressive style was well suited for grass and that she could one day be comfortable on the surface. She was less willing to admit that she was any different now than she was before the French Open.
“As soon as I step on the new court, new surface, I’m like, ‘O.K., let’s try to start fresh,’ ” she said.

