MILAN — On Friday evening, at the palatial Museo Bagatti Valsecchi, once home to a baronial family, Esquire gave a party. At the center of it was Jay Fielden, the new editor of the Hearst men's publication, which has been around since 1933.
Among those who made their ways through rooms lined with tapestries and swords at this Milanese unveiling of the new Esquire man were Diego Della Valle, of Tod's; David Lauren, of Ralph Lauren; Thom Browne and Brunello Cucinelli, of their namesake brands; and Remo Ruffini, of Moncler.
Mr. Fielden, 46, was already known to most of the guests, having made his name in fashion circles as the founding editor of Men's Vogue (2005 to 2008), and, more recently, as the editor of Town & Country, a Hearst title where he retains the title of editorial director.
“I'm a high priest of this, man,” Mr. Fielden said. “I believe in it.”
He looked natty in a brown double-breasted suit, the designer of which he was too discreet to name in a room full of advertisers, although many had ventured onto the terrace on this refreshingly cool night.
Before his entry into journalism, the born-and-bred Texan worked at a Ralph Lauren boutique in San Antonio. This year, he replaced David Granger, the deeply respected (if not exactly fashion-besotted) editor who amassed 17 National Magazine Awards during his 19 years at the Esquire helm.
Along with Mr. Fielden, copies of his first issue, with Viggo Mortensen on the cover in a denim Polo Ralph Lauren jacket and a Brunello Cucinelli shirt, awaited the guests. During his tenure, Mr. Fielden said, fashion will be a particular focus.
The landscape of men's style magazines is changing rapidly in America. At the end of 2015, Condé Nast folded Details; around the same time, Maxim, having hired Kate Lanphear to revamp the magazine in a more fashion-forward and luxury-centric direction, parted ways with her and returned to its naughty, laddie-mag roots. That leaves Esquire to duke it out with GQ, its Condé Nast rival, which held a Milan party of its own Saturday night.
“Having a great competitor is a great thing for everybody,” Mr. Fielden said.
Over a glass of pink Champagne (“Champagne: The Manliest Order,” says the latest Esquire, page 82), Mr. Fielden paused to chat, interrupted intermittently to receive double-cheek kisses and congratulations. A condensed and edited version of our conversation is below.
Can you say where you're hoping to take Esquire?
I want it to be fun, funny, stylish and substantive. Those are four things that if I could apply them to everything in the magazine, I'm happy. It needs a full-on overhaul to be what I think Esquire should be in this day and age, which is dovetailing with a moment in which men are more eager than ever to embrace a certain amount of daring when it comes to style.
Is the guy of 2016 ready for that in a way that the guy of the Men's Vogue era wasn't?
To me, what's exciting about taking on fashion is that I'm a person who likes clothes, but I'm also a guy who worked at The New Yorker for 10 years. I don't think you have to be one guy or the other. I think there's sometimes an assumption, ‘‘Oh, this is a guy who likes the superficial things in life,'' and then, ‘‘This is a guy who's bookish and introverted.'' I don't believe that. I think they can be married together.
Do you feel the magazine had gotten stale or fallen into a rut?
I think with any magazine that is edited by a certain person for a long period of time, it expresses an idea about the world. It was successful, right? It's just inevitable, when you're new to something, you have to ask the most basic questions. And if you ask basic questions and they don't seem to line up with what was, then you have to change it.
Where will we see that change?
A big part of the beginning is how to re-evaluate the content when it comes to fashion and the subject of style. If you think of Esquire, style starts with the words. It always did. It was about being stylish on the page.
For me, fashion has to be as journalistic as the rest of the magazine. It has to be as important and interesting and relevant to this guy's life. If there's a guy who wants to read a 5,000-word piece by a pedigreed writer, then the fashion has to measure up to that.
Did you have any hesitation about taking on this magazine after your predecessor had such a long history and such good will?
Look, stepping into the shoes of anyone who has a great reputation and was an award-winning editor comes with respect, trepidation and careful thought. I think he did amazing things there. He was an amazing editor, yet he wasn't the only one. Esquire's had a number of amazing editors. He took over, and someone will eventually take over for me. That's exciting, that's emboldening and, yes, it keeps you up at night. You know the stakes are high.

