Plenty of artists have explored the relationship between light and shadow to create indelible images and tell a story.
Eva and Franco Mattes — married Brooklyn artists and “hacktivists” — use those ideas metaphorically, peeling back the surface of what they call the “sanitized” internet to reveal its murkier side: the world of content monitoring and the elusive individuals who are tasked with tracking and removing offensive material online.
Their latest exhibition, “Abuse Standards Violations,” on view at London's Carroll/Fletcher gallery until Aug. 27, is a journey into what Ben Vickers, a London curator at the Serpentine Galleries and fan of their work, called “the dark, morbid heart of the internet.”
The focus of the show is four video works from a series, “Dark Content,” which excerpt interviews the Matteses conducted with some of the anonymous, low-paid workers that companies like Google and YouTube employ to remove objectionable material. The content these subcontractors have erased ranges from images of Osama Bin Laden to fringe fetish porn and videos of suicides. One man says a fellow moderator was asked to remove images of SpongeBob laughing.
The project (some earlier portions were shown at the Essex Flowers Gallery in New York last year) raises the question of how much of what they do is censorship, or merely enforcing internet standards, or just arbitrary. It's hard to know: The process of online moderation is shrouded in secrecy.
The Italian-born Matteses are internet art pioneers, comfortable in its strangest realms and seeing the online world very differently than most.
“The theme of our work is that the invisible part of the internet has meaning,” said Mr. Mattes, 40, seated with his wife last month in their jam-packed studio in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn (shared with another artist). “We're fascinated to know anything beyond the password zone.”
Ms. Mattes, 39, has an unconventional hope for visitors to Carroll/Fletcher this summer: “We just really want to encourage people to venture into the ‘dark net.'”
She was referring to the unregulated part of the internet, best known for being a hub of illegal activity, that requires special tools to access and provides anonymity for both posting and viewing content; it forms a small part of the “deep web,” the vast portion not indexed by search engines.
“Anonymity is considered weird or strange: ‘What are you hiding?'” Ms. Mattes said. “But if you think about it, anonymity is key to democracy.”
The Matteses, who come across as part Dada provocateurs, part grad school types (their website is 0100101110101101.org) went to unusual lengths for “Dark Content.” They posted an ad online from a fictitious company supposedly looking for moderators and then explained to those who responded that they just wanted to hear what the moderators' lives were like. (The short answer: challenging and quite sad at times.)
Surprisingly, most respondents agreed to participate in the Matteses' artwork and were paid a few dollars for their time. Then the artists animated the interviews — with software downloaded from the internet, of course — and looped cartoonlike footage of the participants' talking heads on monitors set into the underside of desks, so that London gallerygoers have to peer around the banal-looking office furniture to watch.
Berin Szoka, the president of the nonprofit think tank Tech Freedom, agreed that the world of monitors was murky by design.
“It's a bit of a black box, for obvious reasons,” Mr. Szoka said. “Just as with cybersecurity, you don't want to make too clear what's happening, so that people can't circumnavigate the system.”
The direct inspiration for the project was the couple's own experience of having their work scrubbed from the internet. Six years ago, they filmed Mr. Mattes pretending to hang himself, and then posted the footage on the site Chatroulette, where people have brief video interactions.
They then created a split-screen 2010 artwork, “No Fun,” of the staged hanging, juxtaposed with the various viewer reactions. Mr. Mattes posted it on YouTube, which promptly removed it for violation of the company's policy on “shocking and disgusting content.”
“It had been shown in museums, so when it was removed, we were surprised,” said Mr. Mattes, who wrote to the company to find out why it was removed. He said he received legalese in response.
He added: “It was hard for me to imagine that the internet is more conservative than art museums. I grew up with the idea that art is old and boring, and the Net is fun and exciting, the wild, wild web, where anything can happen.”
That got them thinking about the process. “We wondered, is there some software?” Mr. Mattes recalled. “An algorithm that compiles all the red flags? Most people believe the removal is done that way.”
The moderators in general don't know which company they are working for, said Mr. Mattes. And they see truly disturbing graphic images on a daily basis.
“The worst video I ever saw, personally, was an individual killing and dissecting cats,” one moderator says in the current show.
He goes on to recall the video as “cruel and unusual,” and says, “The cats were killed in a majority of ways: running them over, electrocution, beating, stabbing.” Then he added, “I personally am just not going to continue answering this.”
One particular incident came up over and over. “A lot of them mentioned being asked to remove images of Osama Bin Laden after he was killed,” Ms. Mattes said, which she thought was somehow “politically related” and therefore troubling.
The Carroll/Fletcher show also features the Matteses' 2016 series, “Image Search Results” (the phrase is from Google's comprehensive image search). One work renders the internet as a spooky undersea landscape with each water level representing a more unknowable depth. They had the result printed on a beach towel.
A more lighthearted series, “By Everyone for No One Every Day (BEFNOED)” (2014), is a comment on the universe of content online that may never have any viewers at all. It asks the question, If a tree falls online, does it make a sound?
For it, the Matteses hired people anonymously on crowdsourcing sites to perform what Ms. Mattes called “simple, absurd acts.” One man does handstand push-ups with “Eva and Franco Mattes” written on his belly.
In the gallery, the monitors displaying the bizarre acts are awkwardly installed, so that people must contort themselves to watch, even lying on the floor, “forcing the viewer into being a performer,” Mr. Mattes said.
The installation is typical in its blend of confrontation and playfulness. In an email, Mr. Vickers of the Serpentine Galleries placed the artists on a direct line with the post-World War I Dada movement: “‘The beginnings of Dada,' poet Tristan Tzara recalled, ‘were not the beginnings of art, but of disgust.'”
Christiane Paul, an adjunct curator of new media arts at the Whitney Museum of American Art, said: “They have a reputation of being pranksters, but there's no posturing about it. It's driven by a deep engagement with the issues.”
Ms. Paul cited “Life Sharing” (2000–03) as a “landmark project” by the Matteses. For that work, they made many intimate aspects of their lives — right down to their bank statements — available online.
“They anticipated what would happen with social media platforms,” Ms. Paul said of the now common sharing of mundane activities on blogs, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
Both Ms. Mattes and Mr. Mattes hail from the Italian province of Brescia — and it's worth noting that they declined to say which towns, in an attempt to preserve a sliver of privacy.
They met in 1995 through mutual friends while traveling in Spain, and have been together, and making art as a team, ever since. They've been based in Brooklyn for seven years.
The “Dark Content” works have a journalistic aspect, but Mr. Mattes said he was amazed that there was not more literature shining a light on the topic of content monitoring.
He rejected the idea that the radical duo was going soft by looking at the moderators as human beings.
“A lot of our work has been confrontational, like the one of me hanging myself,” Mr. Mattes said. “ But we are not looking to punch people in the face, either. Hopefully there's something we can we learn from their experiences.”

