“Line,” by the playwright Israel Horovitz, has been in residence on and off at the 13th Street Repertory Company in Greenwich Village since 1974. (Top that, “Hamilton”!) But Mr. Horovitz has been a neighborhood fixture even longer than his absurdist drama.
For that, he can thank the people who hired him to write the screenplay for the 1970 feature film “The Strawberry Statement.”
“I made a bunch of money for the first time in my life. An older lawyer friend advised me to buy a house, and I said, ‘You’re kidding,’ because I didn’t know anyone who had a house,” recalled the very prolific Mr. Horovitz, 77, whose new work, “Out of the Mouths of Babes,” the latest of some six dozen produced plays, continues through July 31 at the Cherry Lane Theater. It tells what happens when four women go to Paris for the funeral of a 100-year-old man and discover that they have quite a lot in common.
In any case, he heeded his friend’s counsel, and in the spring of 1970, moved with his wife and their three children (among them, the future Beastie Boy Adam Horovitz) to a brick townhouse on a street known at the time as Writers’ Block.
“Our doorbell rang the first day, and it was Terrence McNally, who introduced himself and said he lived next door,” Mr. Horovitz said, referring to the author of plays including “Master Class” and “Love! Valour! Compassion!” “We became friends for life.”
But not, as it turned out, neighbors for life. After the dissolution of that marriage, Mr. Horovitz sold the house and moved his children a block east, where he purchased the top two floors of another townhouse — a family house, not a fancy house. He remarried in 1981; subsequently, he and his wife, Gillian, now 61, a retired champion long-distance runner, undertook a renovation.
Now might be a good time to mention that many of Mr. Horovitz’s plays have been produced in France. Consequently, he has spent a lot of time in France, where, he noticed, a lot of people had sinks in their bedrooms. A sink in his New York bedroom would be just the thing.
He handpicked the basin and the antique tiles for the backsplash, and when he came to check on the workers’ progress, inquired about the sink. “And the construction guy said, ‘It’s in the closet, where you told me to put it,’” Mr. Horovitz said. “And I opened the closet, and there was the sink. I said, ‘I never told you to put it in the closet.’ And he said, ‘Yes, you did.’ This was after the supposed six-week reno had gone on for 11 months.”
He continued: “So I said, ‘You know what? I’ve changed my mind. Can you put it on the bedroom wall?’ And he said, ‘It’s going to cost you.’ And he put it there, and once it was plumbed in, I said, ‘Get out, you’re done.’ ”
In 1991, the couple, by then parents of 6-year-old twins, bought out their downstairs neighbor, the best-selling author Steven Gaines, and furnished the house with British and French country furniture, including a linen-press to hold sweaters and a Scottish town clerk’s table to serve as a desk for Mr. Horovitz.
The purchase gave everyone room to spread out, of course; it also changed the way various spaces were designated. On the second floor, for example, is what’s now called the little living room to distinguish it from the big living room on the first floor, a.k.a. Steve Gaines’s living room.
In Steve Gaines’s living room, around a much-loved low table designed by Bernard Vuarnesson, Mr. Horovitz conducts writers’ workshops and has weekly gatherings with playwright colleagues. The table is flanked by two Eames lounge chairs, one an original “that I ran out and bought as soon as I made my first real money,” Mr. Horovitz said.
Its twin, upholstered in white, was on a set for the film adaptation of his play “Author! Author!” and, as demanded in the script, got tossed down a flight of stairs. “I got it as a gift after shooting and dyed it black,” Mr. Horovitz said.
You’d be hard put to point to an object that doesn’t have a story or a boldfaced name attached to it. You’d be equally hard put to find someone who tells the story better or with greater humor than Mr. Horovitz.
An etching of a theater ticket by William Hogarth in the small living room? “Years ago, when the New York Public Library was in trouble, Edward Albee and I were asked to host a benefit auction,” Mr. Horovitz said. “They had a table where they were selling off duplicates, and I saw this ticket that was 25 cents.”
“ ‘This is signed by Hogarth,’ ” he told the man in charge. “And he said, ‘Well, it’s a duplicate.’ And I said, ‘It’s Hogarth.’ And he said, ‘No, you bought it. You own it.’ So there it is. I’ve got it.”
The lithographs by the Dutch painter Bram van Velde? “I really love his work,” Mr. Horovitz said. “Samuel Beckett was kind of my mentor, and I was close with him for years. I was a young guy, and he sent me to an art dealer and I bought a bunch of van Velde prints for 100 francs, 20 bucks apiece. And about 40 years later, I realized they weren’t 100 francs; there’s no way they could have been that cheap. Beckett had paid for them.”
At one time he had three Picasso plates, bought years ago for a song in Antibes. “But my older sons broke all three with baseballs. I kept the pieces to one and glued it back together,” he said, pointing to his salvage job hanging on a wall in the kitchen.
Then there is the likeness of a family pet, a guinea pig called Mr. Pokey, by one of the Horovitz twins, Hannah, who also did a self-portrait in acrylic paint on a chair in the entryway. “She painted Mr. Pokey as a birthday present for me, and when he died I put the portrait in the ground-floor window with a little ‘in memoriam’ sign under it,” Mr. Horovitz said. “We’re on a block with a school, and hundreds of kids pass it every day, and for years now we’ve heard little kids say, ‘Hi, Mr. Pokey’ as they pass. It’s like our Paddington Bear.”
Now among those schoolchildren are four of Mr. Horovitz’s grandchildren — one more thing anchoring him to his longtime home and neighborhood.
“I just love the Village,” Mr. Horovitz said. “I’m a small-town person. Whatever beauty you can find in New York, much of it you can find right here.”

