Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this article, Didi Kirsten Tatlow, a Beijing-based Times correspondent, takes her family to Shanghai and shares what happens when The Magic Kingdom meets The Middle Kingdom.
I wasn’t exactly quaking in my silver Birkenstock sandals as we headed to the Shanghai Disney Resort on Sunday, the first weekend after it officially opened. But I was apprehensive.
With good reason: The first and last time my family and I visited a Disney park, a decade ago in Hong Kong, the prepackaged fun, sticky heat and nonchalantly-wielded umbrellas threatening to poke out everyone’s eyes were too much — I had a meltdown before our son did, retreating to a bench with a thousand-yard stare and leaving my husband to cope. It wasn’t my best parenting, or partnering, moment.
Yet our kids were psyched about Shanghai Disney, so we plunged in. And they loved it. Surprisingly, so did I, more or less.
Located in Shanghai’s eastern Pudong district outside the high-rise city, the prettily landscaped grounds and large lake are a welcome change from the crush of China’s megacities. So after exhaling in pleasure at being amid green, we lined up for a security check and were soon sauntering along “Miji dajie,” or “Mickey Avenue,” as Main Street is called in this sinicized Eden.
(An aside: The Lower Yangtze River Basin, where Shanghai is located, is home to the Chinese, or Yangtze, alligator, a smaller species than the American alligator and very rare in the wild. Although it crossed my mind, I wasn’t worried about an attack of the kind that happened in a Disney World lake in Orlando, Fla.)
First stop: Fantasyland and its centerpiece turreted castle, Disney’s biggest, where we waited for an hour to hear the Snow White story — in Chinese, like everything else here.
“It’s magical,” whispered a woman standing with her small son, as the mirror spoke to us in Mandarin. Intriguingly, while she was Chinese, she spoke in English, a pattern that repeated itself throughout the day.
And it was quite magical. A hologram twirled, birds twittered, the Queen gave Snow White a poisoned apple but Snow White rose again as we moved through a series of cool, dark rooms.
Next stop: an early lunch at Tangled Tree Tavern, where we shared a tasty Sichuan chicken with French fries and red chili peppers, a less-successful Mongolian beef stir-fry, and fish and chips. For fun, we ate the fries with chopsticks, a bit like a game of pick-up sticks. (The restaurant supplies knives, forks and spoons, too.)
This being my family, by popular demand we next headed to Tomorrowland and Star Wars rather than other major attractions such as Treasure Cove or Adventure Isle. The kids met Darth Vader, who they said was truly creepy, and shook hands with C3PO, who bent courteously to receive them. A short movie squished the entire plot into one dizzying sequence, prompting me to wonder if the story was that well known in China.
It was also empty compared to Fantasyland, with some people taking the chance for a quick snooze. I asked two young women why they were there. “It’s nice and cool,” said Mia Liu, 26, from Chongqing in the southwest of the country, by way of explanation. The space was air-conditioned, offering a break from the 90-degree heat and ubiquitous, if today faint, “white-out” of the smog that affects nearly all cities in China.
“ ‘Star Wars’ is popular in China, believe me!” said Ms. Liu’s companion, Shiloh Liang, 30, also from Chongqing. “I think boys like it more than girls,” Ms. Liang said.
(Not in my family. At the gift shop our daughter, 8, got a much-wanted Darth Vader costume complete with mask, causing a stir when she wore it to breakfast in the hotel the next morning. Also a big hit with her was the Star Wars-themed Lego playroom, where each spot was full.)
Cooled down and mellow, we moved on to the Tron roller coaster, a superfast ride unique to Shanghai Disney. But as it screeched past overhead inside its blue-and-silver carapace, our son, 13, decided against it — a bit too stomach-turning, he said. Plus, ever practical, the three-hour wait was too long.
So instead we lurched around in Hunny Pot Spin and on the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train, where the dwarfs “heigh-ho’d” in near-identical garb, their jewels glowing in the dark.
In the park, Anna and Elsa from “Frozen” sang in Chinese and troubadours plucked traditional Chinese instruments — both part of the sinicization asked for by the Shanghai Shendi Group, the state-run consortium that is the 57-percent shareholder in the resort (Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief, says the resort is “both authentically Disney and distinctly Chinese”).
And I played a game. I would do my own sinicization by matching the dwarfs to seven Chinese men who also dress near-identically, some of whom also are said to be wealthy: the members of the elite standing committee of the Politburo of the Communist Party. After all, “Heigh-Ho, Heigh-Ho, It’s Off to Work We Go” could be the anthem of post-Mao Zedong China, where hard work and ambition have lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty.
Xi Jinping, China’s authoritative president, had to be Doc. Li Keqiang would be Happy, his grinning premier. There was tough competition for Grumpy — Chinese politicians are not known for their approachability. Vice premier Zhang Gaoli, whose public demeanor is low-key, could be Dopey, while any of the others could perhaps be Bashful for the public self-deprecation that is an essential skill here. Sneezy … I gave up.
By this time evening was approaching, and a 6:30 p.m. showing of “The Lion King.” We retreated to a Starbucks next door in Disneytown for drinks, snacks and rest. The kids were approaching saturation point.
But here’s the thing: I was doing really well.
After years in the country, and on top of the ill-fated Hong Kong experience, I’d had a list of concerns: shoulder-to-shoulder crowds engaged in behaviors not unique to China but well-documented here such as cutting in line, littering, public urination or defecation by children, arguing, shoving, fighting and the ever-present problem of stinky public toilets.
Some of these problems had popped up during the soft opening in May. To try and control the situation, Xinhua, the state news agency, issued an etiquette guide called the “Six Don’ts Regulations.”
Maybe it worked. Shanghai Disney was a delight. Perhaps in China, where cleanliness and order are at a premium, Disney’s boast that it’s the “Happiest Place on Earth” comes the closest to reality, I thought, as we ambled along neat, flower-lined paths.
The apparently well-built amenities showed no sign of the instantaneous decay that blights much of Chinese construction. The ground was blissfully clean. Employees were friendly and authoritative, not an easy combination in a society where trust is low and people may be unruly.
True, at the castle we had seen a determined attempt at line-cutting by two middle-age women and observed a little girl in gladiator sandals urinating on the ground, though her mother took care to wipe up the mess and put it in a trash can. Near Tangled Tree Tavern, a well-fed boy threw his empty drink bottle into a patch of wood-chip ground behind a bush, to no protest from his family.
But the thousands of visitors on this first weekend were mostly good-humored and polite, many showing the “guanxin,” or consideration, that can make life in China so special, too.
Some quibbles. The attempt to sinicize Disney, though certainly popular here, wasn’t always successful. In the case of a collectible “Minnie” doll, it felt more like cultural opportunism than fusion. Modeled on the Shanghai glamour of the 1920s, the doll looked nothing like the roly-poly mouse.
Here’s the blurb on the box:
I’m pretty sure the kids will be back. Me? Maybe.

