“A 24-Decade History of Popular Music,” the 24-hour-long magnum opus of the playwright and performance artist Taylor Mac, will be presented in its entirety for the first time this fall at St. Ann's Warehouse.
The production, an idiosyncratic history of the United States told through song, runs Sept. 15 through Oct. 8 and opens the St. Ann's season. It will be presented in two ways: as a series of three-hour concerts that cover three decades each, and as a onetime, 24-hour marathon that begins at noon on Oct. 8.
Mac, who uses the gender-neutral pronoun “judy,” has presented excerpts from the project while it has been in development for the past two years. On July 3, Mac sings selections at Joe's Pub; in late July, the first 12 decades will be performed in a series of noon-to-midnight performances at the Powerhouse Theater in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
In performances, Mac has sung popular songs from each decade in American history — beginning with 1776 and ending with the present. The final, total work will consist of 240 songs and 24 costume changes. (The costumes, by Machine Dazzle, are notoriously brazen and sparkling.) For the first decade, Mac will be backed by a 24-piece orchestra. One instrument leaves the orchestra with each new decade, and by the end Mac sings original, not popular, songs without accompaniment.
Other productions during the St. Ann's season include the director Phyllida Lloyd's take on “The Tempest” (Jan. 13-Feb. 12). The play, imported from the Donmar Warehouse in London, is the third and final work in a series of Shakespeare plays — which included “Julius Caesar” and “Henry IV” — that Ms. Lloyd had set in a women's prison. (Her all-female “Taming of the Shrew” ends its run at the Public Theater's Shakespeare in the Park on Sunday.)
Closing the season is “946: The Amazing Story of Adolphus Tips” (March 16-April 9), a play adapted by Emma Rice and the “War Horse” author Michael Morpurgo from his novel. As performed by the British troupe Kneehigh, the production will incorporate spectacle and live music in telling the story of African-American soldiers who were sent to the United Kingdom to rehearse the Normandy invasion during World War II.
Additional productions from the season will be listed soon at stannswarehouse.org.

