GREENBURGH, N.Y. — In message and tone, Phil Jackson did not sugarcoat or oversell the most intriguing trade he has made as the Knicks' team president. Speaking quietly, almost somberly, with reporters before the N.B.A. draft on Thursday night, Jackson said, of the newly acquired Derrick Rose:
“We know he's had issues. There's always risk-reward in this business.”
The Knicks needed a “decisive attack guard,” Jackson said while meeting with reporters at the team's training facility. Weighing the players available in the free-agent market and the Knicks' chances of landing them, trading for Rose was “a decision we really had to think about.”
Rose will meet with members of the news media Friday at Madison Square Garden.
The trade with the Chicago Bulls also brought Justin Holiday, a swingman who could stick as a bench player, and a 2017 second-round draft pick. But it left a gaping hole at center with the departure of Robin Lopez — along with point guards Jerian Grant and Jose Calderon.
When asked if flipping the team's most glaring need to center from guard made sense because he was more confident of landing a free-agent big man, Jackson said, “You're on the right track.”
He didn't name anyone he would target, but Joakim Noah and Pau Gasol, both teammates of Rose's in Chicago and the cerebral-type players Jackson admires, figure to be possibilities.
With Arron Afflalo opting out of his deal for next season, the Knicks are also lacking a starter at the shooting guard position. There has been speculation that Evan Turner, late of the Boston Celtics, might be a candidate, but with only five players currently under contract and roughly $30 million to spend, much will depend on how much Jackson will have to pay to replace Lopez.
“We have to get better in the market,” he said. “We have a variety of possibilities.”
One of them will not be to shift Kristaps Porzingis to center for his second season. Jeff Hornacek, the new coach, made that much clear.
Speaking after Jackson, Hornacek said that Porzingis, at this stage of his career, would not be well served by more than a few minutes a night of entanglement with heavier, stronger players.
Hornacek and Jackson both said that the addition of Rose would benefit Porzingis and Carmelo Anthony, given Rose's ability to attack in transition, an element largely lacking this past season with the slower Calderon and the inexperienced Grant.
“He's not the Derrick Rose of four or five years ago with his speed,” Hornacek said. “But he's still pretty quick.”
Since Hornacek was hired last month, the assumption has been that he will have the freedom to choose his offensive style as long as it fills Jackson's desire for what he calls “system basketball,” which involves all five players.
Rose, who will be 28 when next season begins, has mainly played in the more common high-screen-and-roll type offense. Hornacek said he doubted that Rose would have difficulty in whatever applications of the triangle offense Hornacek may use.
Ball movement would be essential in any fast-paced offense, Hornacek said, and it would also be the key in Rose developing chemistry with Anthony and Porzingis.
“They need each other,” Hornacek said, adding that he knew little of reports that Rose and Jimmy Butler had problems coexisting in Chicago's backcourt last season, leading to Rose's exit.
After all that Rose has been through in Chicago, with injuries after winning the league's Most Valuable Player Award in the 2010-11 season and entering the final year of his contract, leaving his hometown for New York might be just what he needs.
“Maybe that's the little break he needs,” Hornacek said. “Take the pressure off him, let him play.”
Jackson said that Rose had assured him he was happy with the trade. He has been working out in Los Angeles, where he will remain until training camp begins in October.
Hornacek's teams in Phoenix relied heavily on creative guard play, but Jackson said the pursuit of Rose was “already in play” before Hornacek was hired.
Rose played in 66 games this past season, averaging 31.8 minutes, while getting stronger and shooting better later in the season. That said, the Knicks do not have a viable backup on the roster, another complication to factor into the free-agent sweepstakes and Jackson's effective use of his available salary-cap space.
Given Rose's history, Hornacek said he would not mind having two reliable backups at his disposal.
“We have to be alert to how many minutes he's playing,” he said of Rose.
Jackson did not sound optimistic that help would come from the draft. He began the night without a pick in either round. Having used three players to land Rose, the roster was stripped of trade assets, and Jackson elected not to buy a second-round pick, though The Vertical reported after the draft that the Knicks had agreed with the undrafted Wichita State guard Ron Baker on a partially guaranteed one-year deal.
The Knicks are also hoping to bring in Willy Hernangomez, a 6-foot-10 forward from Spain, selected in the second round by Philadelphia last year and dealt to the Knicks.
Free agents will follow in early July, but none are likely to be as big a name as Rose, who may also be coming with a swirl of controversy around him. A lawsuit filed last year by a former girlfriend charged that Rose and two other men drugged her and sexually assaulted her in 2013, and it is scheduled for trial in October.
Rose has denied the allegations, and Jackson, asked about the case, said, “I'm aware of it, yes.”

