The next music director of the New York Philharmonic, Jaap van Zweden, may not exactly be a household name yet. But he apparently set a record as the nation's top-paid conductor when his current ensemble, the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, paid him $5,110,538 in 2013, according to an analysis of the orchestra's tax filings that was released this week.
Mr. van Zweden, a Dutch-born maestro with a growing reputation, received more that year than any other orchestra conductor in America, including Gustavo Dudamel at the Los Angeles Philharmonic, and his total pay was more than twice that of the nearest runner-up, Riccardo Muti at the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.
Most of his compensation came in the form of a Texas-sized signing bonus Mr. van Zweden received that year for agreeing to a long-term contract extension, the orchestra said; his salary that year was $1,788,997. But his $5.1 million in total compensation — first reported by Drew McManus, a consultant and blogger who analyzes major orchestras' most recent tax filings each year on his website, Adaptistration — set a new standard.
Mr. McManus said in an email that for more than a decade, he had been compiling reports based on the tax filings that orchestras, as nonprofits, must make each year, and that this was the highest single season outlay that he had seen. The previous record, he said, was set by Lorin Maazel, who received $3,291,791 in 2009, his last year as music director of the New York Philharmonic. But Mr. McManus cautioned that orchestras vary in how they report pay.
The new record startled the music world, especially at a moment that many orchestras are under fiscal pressure. The Dallas Morning News translated the reaction into Texan on its website with the headline: “Holy cow! Jaap van Zweden was one well-paid dude at the Dallas Symphony Orchestra.”
Mary Lou Falcone, a spokeswoman for Mr. van Zweden and the orchestra, said that the money for the signing bonus had come entirely from one person, who had made the donation as a restricted gift exclusively for that purpose.
The contract Mr. van Zweden signed that year originally called for him to remain music director in Dallas through the 2018-19 season. But the orchestra agreed to release him a year early so he could take the job in New York, where he will begin his five-year contract as music director in the 2018-19 season. He will appear in Dallas as conductor laureate through 2020-21.
Ms. Falcone said that Mr. van Zweden had decided to use most of the bonus to benefit the orchestra directly in the coming years, but did not elaborate on details. Katherine Johnson, a spokeswoman for the New York Philharmonic, declined to say what Mr. van Zweden would be paid in New York, but said that it would be in line with what its current music director, Alan Gilbert, earns. He made $1,751,570 in 2013, according to the orchestra's most recent tax filing.

