When Jose Reyes left the Mets after the 2011 season, the parting seemed inevitable. The Mets were in the midst of a tear-down induced by the Bernard L. Madoff scandal, and although Reyes won the National League batting title that season, the principal owner Fred Wilpon had already declared that he would not pay him “Carl Crawford money.”
Miami came close — offering Reyes a six-year, $106 million deal — as part of a free-agent splurge that was supposed to accompany the Marlins into their new stadium and into World Series contention, in which Reyes would be the Spanish-speaking face of an ascendant franchise.
Now, less than five years later, the Mets and Reyes could not run toward each other quickly enough. When Reyes became a free agent at 1 p.m. Saturday after being released by Colorado, it took only an hour and 15 minutes for them to be reunited.
The Mets' floundering offense could use a jolt at the top that Reyes, even with his 33-year-old legs, may still provide. And Reyes could use a welcoming landing spot after being jettisoned by Colorado, which swallowed the $38 million left on his contract when he returned from a 51-game suspension for a domestic violence case.
That episode, in which Reyes was arrested in Hawaii and accused of assaulting his wife at a hotel, adds a layer of complexity to his return. While there are questions about what Reyes has left as a player — he hit .259 last season after being traded by Toronto to Colorado, and he has not played in a major league game this season — his domestic violence case was also part of any interested team's evaluation.
As domestic violence awareness has increased in recent years, driven in large part by the case against the former N.F.L. player Ray Rice, organizations face greater scrutiny in how they deal with players accused of abusing women.
The Dodgers backed out of a trade with Cincinnati last December for reliever Aroldis Chapman, and Boston dropped its pursuit when domestic violence accusations against him came to light. When the Reds' asking price dropped low enough, the Yankees swooped in to acquire Chapman on the cheap, a bit of opportunism that General Manager Brian Cashman readily acknowledged, even as it drew criticism from some domestic violence experts, fans and a city councilwoman.
Reyes, no longer the commodity that Chapman is, hardly seemed worth the trouble for many teams.
Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson, during a conference call Saturday, braced for some blowback, explaining in detail how the team had proceeded. Alderson met for one hour with Reyes last week, the focal point being the domestic violence case and steps Reyes was taking in counseling. Jeff Wilpon, the team's chief operating officer, had been involved in every step. Alderson also reaffirmed the team's commitment to domestic violence training for every team employee, be it coach, player, mail clerk or president.
“We fully understand that there will be differences of opinion about this, that some people will feel strongly and differently,” Alderson said. “I think we accept that and respect that.”
The Mets, in bringing Reyes back, can have it several ways. They landed him cheap, for the prorated major league minimum salary of about $300,000. If Reyes, who will begin a minor league stint Sunday at Class A Brooklyn, can handle the transition from shortstop to third base to replace the injured David Wright, or fill the void in left field, the Mets could have a rejuvenated four-time All-Star to whom fans would probably quickly warm again.
Also, not insignificantly, the Mets may be best equipped to help Reyes.
“Domestic violence is a choice,” said Cindy Southworth, the executive vice president of the National Network to End Domestic Violence. “Because it's behavior that can be chosen, it's also behavior that cannot be chosen. People can come back from that and have a more respectful relationship. It's hard work and needs a trained therapist, but I do think it's possible.”
Southworth emphasized a point that she said could seem counterintuitive: Reyes being allowed to continue his career could benefit his wife and others who find themselves in abusive relationships with athletes.
“What we don't want is for someone, the moment the police are called, is for an athlete to lose his entire career,” she said. “It would create huge, unfathomable pressure not to call 911 if they knew their loved one's career would be in jeopardy.”
Reyes is one of three players — along with Chapman (30 games) and Atlanta third baseman Hector Olivera (82 games) — who have been disciplined under Major League Baseball's domestic violence policy, which was instituted last August in concert with the players' union in the hope of addressing cases more adroitly than the N.F.L. had.
While much of the attention has focused on penalties — Reyes lost more than $6.1 million in salary — M.L.B.'s policy is also aimed at changing behavior. So, while players are subject to discipline, they are also required to take other steps, including meeting with psychologists who can prescribe counseling plans, as Alderson said Reyes has done.
Although Omar Minaya, a former general manager for the Mets and one of Reyes's biggest supporters, is no longer with the team, there is still an affinity for Reyes by some in the organization who have had long ties with him, including Jeff Wilpon and Manager Terry Collins.
Reyes was not always a model player in New York; he could sulk, and the former manager Willie Randolph once pulled him from a game for not hustling. But as someone that the Mets watched blossom from a raw 16-year-old from the Dominican Republic into one of baseball's most dynamic players, there is a sense, Alderson said, that Reyes is one of their own.
His case is not unlike that of Wally Backman, the team's former second baseman whom the Mets took in as a minor league manager after he was dismissed by Arizona as its manager. The move came four days after the Diamondbacks hired Backman when a trail of legal troubles — including domestic disputes with two wives — were reported.
Alderson said that Reyes would be held to a high standard and that he would support groups working against domestic violence.
Southworth said: “When we talk about holding men accountable, it helps if people you love and respect call you when you treat your partner badly and use violence. Given that there's history here, that may be supportive. In any situation, having close men — especially if you respect those men and value the relationship — you're not going to want to put it in jeopardy. It's easier to hear hard conversations.”
Whether signing Reyes turns out to be a savvy baseball move will be revealed in the coming months, when it becomes clear how much of his game-changing ability remains.
But as much as Reyes might give the Mets, it is hard to imagine it matching what they have given him: a second chance.

