You'd hardly expect the mayor of New York City, with its $82 billion budget and 300,000 employees, to get involved with buying garbage bags.
For years, Joseph Dussich, the owner of a company in Queens that makes anti-rat garbage bags, could not get city officials to consider buying them.
Last year, though, that changed after Mr. Dussich made the second of two donations of $50,000 apiece to a political advocacy group run by allies of Mayor Bill de Blasio.
Ten days later, records show, Mr. de Blasio met with Mr. Dussich in City Hall to thank him for the contributions. The meeting was arranged by one of the mayor's chief fund-raisers, Ross Offinger, according to two people familiar with the account that Mr. Dussich has given to federal authorities investigating City Hall fund-raising.
Mr. Dussich, who brought one of his sons to the meeting, chatted briefly with Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, about their shared Italian heritage.
As the visit with Mr. de Blasio was breaking up, Mr. Dussich was met at the mayor's office by a City Hall aide, Peter Hatch, who then connected Mr. Dussich to purchasing officials at the parks department.
Within a month, Mr. Dussich's company, JAD Corporation of America, was given a $15,000 contract that allowed parks officials to try out his product, Mint-X, a heavy-duty scented bag that is advertised as repellent against the Norway rat.
Later, the city sought bids for a five-year supply of bags registered with the Environmental Protection Agency as rodent repellent. Mr. Dussich's website claims Mint-X is the only such bag on the market. He was not the low bidder, but the company that did get the city contract is buying about $3 million in bags from him, according to Mr. Dussich's lawyer, Roland G. Riopelle.
In the account given by Mr. Dussich, there was no talk of the garbage bags with Mr. de Blasio during the brief meeting. “We're confident that once the government's investigation is completed, they will find that my client didn't do anything wrong,” Mr. Riopelle said.
As widely reported last month, when F.B.I. agents arrived unannounced at parks department headquarters their questioning of the agency's senior purchasing official was interrupted by lawyers with the city Corporation Counsel's office, who insisted on being present.
The mayor's office would not discuss the donations, the meeting, the calls or the purchase of the Mint-X bags.
“We're confident that the parks department and this administration have acted appropriately and done everything by the book,” Eric Falk Phillips, the mayor's press secretary, said on Thursday. “Our interest in respecting and protecting the integrity of the U.S. attorney's review prohibits us from commenting further right now.”
New Yorkers are not shy about buttonholing their mayors with issues as granular as potholes on a specific avenue, noisy streetlights or their own schemes to improve city services.
Whether legal or not, the garbage bag episode illustrates the collapse of careful defenses built up in the city over the last three decades against “pay to play” practices in which people gave campaign contributions to gain access to or favors from powerful officials.
Public financing of campaigns, started in New York City in the late 1980s, helped liberate the city from pay to play, which was rampant at the time. Laws passed in the last decade limited people or companies doing business with the city from contributing to official campaigns.
“But independent spenders raising unlimited contributions and making unlimited expenditures can skew those boundaries rapidly,” according to a 2014 report by the Campaign Finance Board. The report said the Supreme Court's Citizens United ruling in 2010 — which lifted limits on spending by groups that were, on paper at least, independent of campaigns — had a profound effect on the city campaigns in 2013.
“Outside spending is not new to city elections,” the report said, “but the scope was astonishing: $15.9 million spent over all; $6.2 million in City Council primaries alone.”
Mr. de Blasio's campaign was the beneficiary of the bulk of the independent money spent during the 2013 primaries and general election. After he took office in 2014, his allies again used nominally independent entities, just as surrogates of the governors of New York, New Jersey and other states have done. The de Blasio-affiliated Campaign for One New York was created to advance his prekindergarten and affordable housing initiatives, and raised more than $4 million before closing in March. Much of that came in the form of unlimited donations from companies and unions doing business with the city. The campaign voluntarily disclosed its contributors.
Among them: Joseph Dussich, maker of the Mint-X anti-rat bag, guest of the mayor at City Hall and, after years of facing slammed doors, a suddenly successful vendor.

