OMAHA — When a famous relative of Oklahoma State pitcher Tyler Buffett arrived at the family’s rented lake house Sunday night for cheeseburgers and cheesecake, it took him a moment to remember the relative from old family photos. Then the images came in a rush. The gray hair. The big glasses.
“He looked a little bit different, but I knew who he was,” Buffett said. “My mom and my dad took me over and said to him, ‘This is the guy who plays baseball.’”
That was how Tyler Buffett met Warren Buffett, the 85-year-old chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway, one of the richest men in the world and a big baseball fan who happens to be the first cousin of Tyler Buffett’s grandfather.
“It was cool,” Tyler Buffett said. “It was more of a conversation than me trying to talk to him.”
Luckily, the Buffetts speak a similar language — baseball. This week Tyler Buffett, a junior right-hander, is drawing attention at the College World Series for both his pitching and his bloodlines.
Buffett tossed eight scoreless innings Monday night in a 1-0 victory over Arizona. The Oklahoma State Cowboys, making their first C.W.S. appearance since 1999, are one win from next week’s championship series. Buffett permitted three hits, struck out six and allowed only one runner past first base.
Cowboys Coach Josh Holliday, the older brother of St. Louis Cardinals left fielder Matt Holliday, called it a “big league outing.” Warren Buffett agreed. He watched the game on television at home, down to the last out, his first time watching Tyler play.
“He pitched fabulously,” Warren Buffett said Tuesday morning in a telephone interview from his Omaha office. “He just went to work. He didn’t dawdle out there in the mound. He had some really good stuff. We talked a little bit about that on Sunday night, different pitches, how he delivered them, all that sort of thing.”
Monday represented the third consecutive outstanding start in the N.C.A.A. tournament for Tyler Buffett (9-3, 2.84 E.R.A.), a seventh-round draft pick by the Houston Astros who worked out of the bullpen for most of the season.
Warren Buffett did not know about a college pitcher in the family until Tyler’s father, John, told him two years ago. Warren Buffett said he planned to be at TD Ameritrade Park for Tyler’s next start, most likely in the championship series if Oklahoma State advances.
“When I get through here, I’m going to call T. Boone Pickens and see if he’ll come up for a game,” Buffett said of the financier, an Oklahoma State alumnus and a major donor to the Cowboys’ athletic program. “I’d like to do it when Tyler’s pitching.”
Warren Buffett and Tyler’s grandfather George Buffett were grandsons of Ernest Buffett, an Omaha grocer. George’s family moved to Albuquerque when he was 10, and he served 24 years in the New Mexico Legislature and founded a popular candy company. Tyler’s Twitter handle, @Candyman1111, honors his grandfather, who died in 2012.
Warren Buffett kept in touch with George’s widow, Jeanette, and stopped by the candy store whenever he visited Albuquerque.
“My sister had done some genealogical work 25 or 30 years ago,” Warren Buffett said. “As near as we can tell — this will surprise you — there are only about 100 Buffetts in the United States. It looks like a name you would see everyplace. When you’re talking to Tyler, he is 1 percent of the entire Buffett population in the country.”
The Buffett connection was not well known until Warren tipped off The Omaha World Herald, which Berkshire Hathaway owns.
“I had no idea,” Holliday said. “When Tyler told me about it, I said, ‘What a small world.’ There’s no better event or better city to bring people together like the College World Series in Omaha.”
The Sunday night get-together was relaxed and informal, Tyler Buffett said. His parents rented a house on a lake just across the Iowa-Nebraska state line, not far from TD Ameritrade Park. They brought green chili from New Mexico to mix with the cheeseburgers. Warren Buffett ate a plain one.
“We were eating cheeseburgers; he was drinking his Cherry Coke like he likes,” Tyler Buffett said. “It was really like we were family hanging out. His wife, Astrid, was out in the backyard fishing with my little sister. It was much more of a family occasion than most people would probably think.
“He would ask me how it was growing up playing baseball. I asked him some questions about our family, if he knew certain people, how the Buffett grocery was way back in the day. I definitely haven’t met many people who know as much about baseball history as he does.”
Warren Buffett’s passion for baseball began in boyhood. His father took him by train to his first major league game, between the Chicago Cubs and the Brooklyn Dodgers at Wrigley Field on May 17, 1939. The game lasted 19 innings and was called because of darkness, tied at 9-9.
“I always felt when a game didn’t last 18 or 19 innings after that, I didn’t get my money’s worth,” Buffett said, laughing. “I got spoiled.”
Buffett’s friends in baseball include Bob Gibson and Alex Rodriguez. Buffett gleefully recalled needling George H. W. Bush, a former Yale first baseman, for being left on deck to end the 1948 College World Series when the batter ahead of him hit into a triple play.
“He’s the nicest guy in the world, and he still gets mad about that play,” Buffett said. “It makes him madder than anything the Russians did. I don’t blame him, either.”
Buffett shared more stories with Tyler on Sunday and again on Tuesday when Tyler’s family visited the Berkshire Hathaway offices. Tyler Buffett could not say whether winning a C.W.S. game or spending time with Warren Buffett was the bigger thrill of his first trip to Omaha.
“I’ll tell you in a couple of years,” he said. “I’m sure I’ll remember them forever.”

