PARIS — It is a telling detail that at fashion shows, critics and retailers tend to sit on opposite sides of the runway. Agreement on the merits or failings of any individual collection, or the fashion season as a whole, is as hard to come by in this world as accord across the aisle is in politics. A few collections manage the feat of pleasing everyone, but many others are critically beloved while impossibly unsalable, or till-ringingly commercial but poorly or begrudgingly reviewed.
With the men's fashion season now past the halfway point, it is a fine time to take the temperature of the season. The international scrum of editors, journalists and retailers (and the usual few drop-in celebrities) have come and gone to London, Florence (for the Pitti Uomo fair) and Milan and have arrived in Paris for the final leg of the twice-yearly tour, packing and repacking their oversized and often overweight luggage four times.
It is a transitional moment. Brands are grappling with whether to adopt a see-now, buy-now schedule of showing just before product arrives in stores. Several are between named designers (Calvin Klein Collection, Salvatore Ferragamo, Berluti) and others are not on the schedule, having combined their men's shows with their women's or elected to take a season off to give their new designers time to prepare (Burberry, Ermenegildo Zegna, Bottega Veneta, Saint Laurent).
“It's almost like the Big Bang theory right now,” said Eric Jennings, the vice president and men's fashion director of Saks Fifth Avenue, who comes to the shows to offer direction to the buyers purchasing for the 40-some Saks stores that carry men's wear. “I feel like we're in flux. Things are shooting out all over in men's wear. Where they land, and which little planets grow into big planets, is anyone's guess.”
Uncertainty has bred retrenchment.
“What a lot of brands have done is taken their best sellers and expanded on them,” Mr. Jennings said. “Nothing revolutionary, but an expansion of the existing trends that are working.”
Among those trends, he cited sport-influenced pieces and the vintage-y, Gucci-esque look he called “retro-eclecticism.”
Sam Lobban, the buying manager for Mr Porter, the men's e-commerce site, agreed. “There was a real continuation from a lot of trends that we saw starting in fall that have settled in now, and it feels like that's going to be the vibe for the season,” he said, noting it is promising for sales, and adding, “A guy likes to develop a style and buy into product that's going to carry you through a fair few seasons.”
In the editorial section of the shows' bench seating, this evolution over revolution has led to some grumbles of ho-hum. Barring a few standouts (varying by individual tastes, but often including Raf Simons, Gucci and Prada), the collections for spring 2017 have been received with a weary shrug.
On the retailers' bench, a different story was being told. Despite widespread reports of challenging conditions for retail, attitudes were (perhaps enforcedly) sunny.
“The interesting thing is, given all the talk of disruption, the season's been really strong,” said Bruce Pask, the men's fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman in New York (and former men's fashion director of T: The New York Times Style Magazine).
All three men cited Prada as a particular standout. Individually, they praised collections by Neil Barrett, Moncler Gamme Bleu, Gucci and Fendi. In Paris, the debut runway show for Balenciaga's men's wear by Demna Gvasalia, its new creative director, was eagerly anticipated. (Those who sell Mr. Gvasalia's men's wear for Vetements, his other collection, said it was selling briskly.) Dries Van Noten, Thom Browne and Givenchy were also among the anticipated highlights.
The shows, aggressively styled as they are, represent an exaggerated version of what eventually ends up in stores. As much as 80 percent of a store's buy is from precollections, which are seen privately even before the runway season starts, Mr. Jennings said.
Yet more and more, he added, the runway shows and precollections are being knitted together, appealing to customers following the action in real time.
“A fashion customer is aware of what's going on the runway,” Mr. Pask said. “I was Instagramming with a client right after the show — he was pointing out a look he would be interested in for an event next season.”
He would pass that information along to his buyers, he said, “absolutely.”

