In this series for T, the writer and author of “Worn Stories,” Emily Spivack, interviews creative types about their most prized possessions.
As the co-creator of Marcel the Shell — a tiny creature with a big heart — it may come as no surprise that Jenny Slate has a thing for small animals. Here, the comedian and actress (and voice in the upcoming animated film “The Secret Life of Pets”) discusses the great pleasure she takes in them, and one diminutive wooden rabbit she holds dear.
For my whole life I have been interested in small animals that are doing their own thing in a big world — animals that are unaware of whether they're big or small. I started to collect wooden animals like these rabbits because the objects were so peaceful to me. I have this habit of giving myself little treats, either when I am happy or when I am sad, and I have about 10 of them. The animals are painted with colors that aren't really part of the color palette for toys today — they are the color of vegetables and Sesame Street in the 1980s.
I love rabbits. I love them so much. They're wise and gentle and they are very, very quiet. I love “Watership Down” and “The Velveteen Rabbit.” When I was little, my mom would say, “Quick like a bunny!” whenever it was time to get ready for bed, and that made me want to do it. Sometimes I'll keep one of these rabbits in my bag. I'll keep it there to calm myself down and nobody knows it's there. I love having a little secret that doesn't hurt anybody and that's a reassertion of myself. I tend to be calm and happy when I'm looking at things like this rabbit, which remind me of when I was younger and only knew how to be myself.
When I was little I felt that there was something alive in my stuffed animals and in this Madame Alexander doll I slept with every night named Pudding. I slept with 36 stuffed animals and they were in a specific rotation so that each could get a night sleeping next to me. I didn't want to hurt their feelings. I wanted them to understand that there was a system and that they would have to be patient. What I was doing was self-soothing as a child — just telling myself, “The world works this way, don't worry about it, you're going to get everything you need.”
Notions of wonder and the inner life of smaller things is integral to what I do — not just to my work but to how I live. Within something really small can be something that is complete and that doesn't need to be sized up in any way. I love little beating hearts. I love that they beat just as strongly as big ones. I am fascinated by things that could be crushed but continue to keep on going because I feel like that as well. As a standup comedian, when I go onstage I'm very honest about the fact that my feelings are easily hurt, that I care about being looked at, and that I'm putting it on the line.
I keep my field of vision small during the day and I try to be kind. Obviously, I mess up all the time. Like a lot of comedians and performers, I can be anxious and lonely, and I'm usually a chatterbox in an effort to hide the fact that I feel shy. But I am calm at the end of the night when I go to bed and know that I've kept it small.
There's a whole thing about ladies who have too many cats, and I understand that, but we don't examine the women and men who have houses filled with figurines. That to me is much more of a concern and I don't want to be that! But I do like creating tableaus all over my house with plants or little animals. I like the idea that even though my house is mine, there are little things living peacefully all over it. They are not aware of me, not just because they are inanimate, but because they're their own thing. It's the weirdest thing to feel so strongly that you love a small wooden rabbit but it doesn't respond to you at all. It can't validate my feelings — I just feel the way I feel and it's exciting to trust in that process.
This interview has been edited and condensed.

