My partner and I rent a market-rate apartment with a built-in heating and air-conditioning unit, but the air-conditioning component does not work. An air-conditioner repairman told us that the unit is 20 years old, rusted, and will likely start leaking into our apartment and the one below us if it is not replaced. He said replacing it would cost $1,800. The landlord refuses to replace the unit, saying he is not responsible for air-conditioning, only heat. Our apartment will be unbearable this summer without air-conditioning. Who is responsible?
Battery Park City, Manhattan
With July, and all the sweltering heat it brings, less than a week away, I can understand why you would want a functioning air-conditioner. To figure out if your landlord has to fix or replace your broken one, read your lease again. See if it says anything about who is responsible for air-conditioning, said David E. Frazer, a lawyer who represents tenants. The lease could put the burden on your landlord, but it could also put it on you, the tenant.
It might also say nothing about air-conditioners at all. If that is the case, you could argue that because the air-conditioner was already in place when you moved in, it is implicitly part of the bundle of services included in your lease. You might also be able to claim that a broken air-conditioner leads to unbearable heat, breaching the warranty of habitability, a state law.
But as a practical matter, how do you get the landlord to fix it? You could take him to court to enforce your rights, but that comes at a steep price. “The legal costs of hauling the landlord into court will certainly exceed $1,800,” Mr. Frazer said. And that is not the only price you will pay. Let's say you take him to court and win. He fixes the air-conditioner and then, when your lease expires, he does not offer you a new one — which is his prerogative, because you're a market-rate tenant.
Instead, consider using the air-conditioner as a negotiating tactic. Offer to pay the $1,800 to replace the unit in exchange for a new lease at the same rent. A year without a rent increase might take the sting out of the repairman's bill. It would also guarantee you another year in a cooler apartment.
•
I am a rent-stabilized tenant in a co-op building. Recently, at the co-op board's behest, my overnight guests have been asked by the doormen to sign in, even though I am home. Nothing in my lease requires it. Is this legal, and can my guests and I refuse?
Upper West Side, Manhattan
As a rent-stabilized tenant, you are bound by the terms of your lease and the rent-stabilization law, not by the rules of the co-op, said Andrew J. Wagner, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.
The co-op is not your landlord; whoever owns the apartment is. And your agreement with your landlord is detailed in your lease, so you are not beholden to the co-op's rules. For example, if your lease permits pets and the building institutes a no-pets policy, you would be exempt from such a rule, Mr. Wagner said. In this case, you could argue that your guests do not need to sign a ledger because your lease does not require it.
But be prepared for pushback. The board might see your resistance as undermining a rule designed to protect the safety of residents and the building. Other people who live in your building — including renters — might feel safer knowing that guests are monitored. Asking that all guests identify themselves is one way to provide a measure of security.
And if you refuse to comply with the rule and the co-op board takes you to court over the matter, a judge might not sympathize with your plight. Instead, the court might find that following this new rule would not create a hardship for you, nor would it undermine the terms of your tenancy, but it would provide security for residents. “I could easily see a judge enforcing the policy against the tenant as a reasonable safety measure,” Mr. Wagner said.
•
I'm interested in investing in real estate to diversify my portfolio, but can't quite afford to do it on my own. I have a few fiscally responsible, like-minded friends who have expressed interest in investing with me, perhaps in a neighborhood like Hudson Heights or Jackson Heights. Is this a good idea? And how would we set it up, from a legal standpoint?
New Paltz, N.Y.
It is no secret that buying real estate in New York City is expensive. Going in with friends could certainly defray some of the cost. But a business relationship is different from a friendship; it can be far more intimate and, at times, fraught. Before you sign any papers, make sure you know your partners.
In addition to being fiscally minded, do your friends share your temperament? What about your tolerance for risk? If you plan to rent out these properties, how involved would everyone need to be? Do you share the same goals for the properties?
Before you even start looking at property, you should be in agreement about the finer details of your investment and how you would handle unexpected problems. “Having partners can make managing an investment more difficult, because every decision must be made in accordance with your agreement,” said Andrew B. Freedland, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.
Carl A. Ekroth, an associate broker with Douglas Elliman on the Anders-Ekroth Team, said he has seen partnerships unravel before they ever get off the ground. “Without a clear and concise plan of action regarding a budget and neighborhood,” he said, “members will often find themselves bickering about these details, thereby losing potential opportunities.”
To avoid pitfalls, hire a lawyer to draft a legal structure for your partnership, like a limited liability company. Clear guidelines will provide a framework for how to proceed and will help you avoid conflicts in the future.
“While not all disputes can be avoided, many of them can be avoided through a solid business structure,” Mr. Freedland said.
A proper corporate structure will also shield all the partners from liability, protecting personal assets.

