WASHINGTON — It was a serendipitous moment during an otherwise uneventful Bernie Sanders campaign rally in Portland, Ore.: A small bird landed on Mr. Sanders’s lectern mid-speech and locked eyes with him before flying away to applause from an appreciative crowd.
As Mr. Sanders’s supporters posted photos and videos of the amusing interruption to their social networks, his small digital team sprang into action. They edited the video and pushed it out on Twitter to more than two million followers. They created animated graphics of Mr. Sanders and his new friend, “Birdie,” depicted with a scraggly white coif of hair to match the candidate’s. They sent emails and created Facebook ads asking supporters to donate in exchange for stickers and images of “Birdie.”
In doing so, they turned a viral moment into a small-dollar fund-raising windfall: The Sanders campaign raised $3.6 million in just a few days, all of it from online donations. It was illustrative of the approach the campaign took throughout the Democratic presidential primary, during which it raised roughly $216 million of its nearly $230 million total online.
Like most modern campaigns, Mr. Sanders and his team relied on widely used digital fund-raising tactics, like sending email solicitations and advertising online. They raised more than $61 million and acquired more than three million email addresses directly from digital ads, according to Revolution Messaging, the company behind the campaign’s efforts.
But the campaign was also able to harness social media networks — which, until recently, most candidates had used primarily for messaging purposes — and turn them into fund-raising engines, allowing Mr. Sanders’s team to raise money almost exclusively online.
“In those early days, when he had just launched and he was still a novel concept, we were bombarding liberals on social media, people who we thought would like his message, and it was just going gangbusters,” said Keegan Goudiss, the campaign’s director of digital advertising and a partner at Revolution Messaging.
Mr. Goudiss said that early on, more than 40 percent of the money being raised was driven by digital ads. And unlike most campaigns he had worked on, where converting supporters into donors was a prolonged process, he said, “with Bernie, especially early on, people were signing the petition and giving right away.”
The initial success allowed the Sanders campaign to invest much more heavily in its online fund-raising operation and eschew traditional donor events. His team held just nine in-person fund-raisers during the entire campaign and did not have a single staff member dedicated to in-person fund-raising.
Though digital advertising costs much less than broadcast, it still requires a significant investment. The campaign spent $15 million on these efforts and had a digital budget of more than $30 million.
“Their campaign spent substantially more building and maintaining a community of online donors,” said Matt Lira, a digital strategist who has worked with Republican candidates. “As with both Obama and Romney in 2012, this community will echo long past their campaign, creating an advantage for candidates they support.”
The decision to invest heavily, and eventually almost exclusively, in digital advertising was made very early in the campaign.
In the 24 hours after Mr. Sanders declared his candidacy in the dewy grass outside the Capitol, his campaign raised $1 million online. Almost immediately, his digital team wanted that reinvested in more spending.
“The room was silent,” Mr. Goudiss recalled, but Mr. Sanders and his closest advisers recognized the immediate impact. “We left that meeting with a commitment of $250,000 and a promise for more if we could prove the value of the ads we were placing,” Mr. Goudiss said.
They would not have to wait long: Millions of dollars began to flow steadily through the apparatus of the fledgling campaign, propelling Mr. Sanders from a fringe candidate to a cash-rich populist powerhouse who would win 22 primaries and caucuses.
The campaign learned early on that digital platforms and social networks were where his supporters could be reached. Mr. Sanders’s digital team made ads for Snapchat, the video messaging service, and tailored their emails and donation pages to a mobile-first audience, efforts that paid off: 43 percent of donations were made from mobile devices.
The reach of Mr. Sanders’s online ads also allowed his team to wait before releasing more expensive broadcast ads. In July 2015, for example, a promoted ad on Facebook that focused on health care quickly received 46,000 likes, significantly higher than the normal reach of a post. Ads like this kept the campaign afloat and climbing in the polls for the first six months, and Mr. Sanders did not run a television ad until November.
Though the campaign put significant resources behind its online advertising and social media outreach, its email program was still the king in terms of fund-raising, accounting for more than $114 million in donations.
The effort was not all about serendipitous moments, however. For the first Democratic debate, staff members had planned to send three fund-raising emails: one before the debate, one during and one after. They waited for the right moment and began sending the messages. Then Mr. Sanders told Hillary Clinton, “The American people are sick and tired of hearing about your damn emails,” and the team pulled the equivalent of a “stop the presses.”
“We scrapped the draft we had, even though there were 200,000 that already got the initial email mid-debate,” said Michael Whitney, a senior strategist at Revolution Messaging who serves as digital fund-raising manager for the Sanders campaign. “We were out with a new email within 15 to 20 minutes.” The campaign raised $2.5 million in the 24 hours after that debate.
The Sanders team was not alone in its ability to capture moments and turn them into money; the Clinton campaign turned Donald J. Trump’s accusation that Mrs. Clinton was playing the “woman card” into millions of dollars, for example.
The online successes point to a new reality for digital campaigning, one that future candidates can expect to build on.
“The bird thing, it’s like, you have this envy of the technology available and their prowess and the moment,” said Joe Trippi, a Democratic strategist who ran Howard Dean’s 2004 campaign. “If that had happened in 2004, there is not a damn thing we could have done. Now, you have the prowess to take advantage of it and the network that they built on, and you can do amazing things with it.”

