ST. LOUIS — When asked to pick the best moment of her life since becoming the Olympic all-around champion four years ago, Gabby Douglas had to stop and think.
She has written an autobiography and created her own set of emoji. She has made a movie based on her life, and has a starring role in her own reality show. Those were great, she told me, but not the highlight.
For her, nothing matches her favorite prize of her instant celebrity: walking the red carpet.
“At the Golden Globes, Mark Wahlberg was like, ‘What’s up, Gabby?’ And he was on my left and P. Diddy was on my right, and I was in shock,” Douglas said, giggling. “Then Anne Hathaway was like, ‘Hey, Gabby!’ And I was like, ‘Hey!’ and tried to be calm, not to be a fan girl.”
The funny thing, though, is that of all her memorable moments since the London Games, Douglas didn’t mention one that had to do with gymnastics, the very thing that has defined her young, sparkly life.
In 2012, she was just 16 — a 4-foot-11, 94-pound happy ball of energy — when she was the surprise gold medalist in London. She became the first black woman and the fourth American woman to win the Olympic all-around title. That brought a host of opportunities unrelated to gymnastics, and she took advantage of many of them.
But now, at 20 — and having grown to 5 feet 2 — Douglas is back. At this week’s United States nationals here, she is again one of the top gymnasts, poised to make her second Olympic team. While her teammate Simone Biles — who has won the past three world championships in the all-around — is expected to win the gold, Douglas is in a position to play a leading role for the second Summer Games in a row after finishing second to Biles at last year’s world championships.
It seems to be a no-brainer that the reigning Olympic champion would defend her gold. But in gymnastics, it’s not as easy as it sounds. The last Olympic champion to successfully defend her gold medal in the all-around was Vera Caslavska of Czechoslovakia, in 1968. In 1980, Nadia Comaneci of Romania came close, but settled for silver after winning gold in 1976.
The truth is, most all-around champions retire as fast as they can, lured away from the gym because of burnout and injury and college and economics. That, and what for many is the first true taste of freedom after a lifetime of training.
Getting back to the top level of gymnastics after taking more than a year off, though, is an unbelievable challenge, even for the most disciplined gymnast. Her time off, as Douglas explained it, was delicious. She could finally sleep in. Make her own schedule. Travel. Act like a typical teenager.
“Life was easy, you know,” she said. “But then I remembered that I had this thing deep inside of me. I felt that I could go to another Olympics, and that voice was saying: ‘Go for it. Do it.’ And it pulled me back to the gym.”
The way back has been bumpy. Douglas left her longtime coach, Liang Chow, in Iowa to move to Los Angeles so she could be near her family there. Then she changed coaches again, moving to Ohio to train at Buckeye Gymnastics outside Columbus.
The work was more demanding and more tiring than she expected it to be. What made it even harder was that Douglas’s body had matured, and so flipping and twisting were not as simple as they once were. (This is another reason gymnasts regularly age out of the sport.) But her experience also gave her an advantage: She didn’t have to do as many repetitions.
With Kittia Carpenter, her new coach, she is also relying more on video and other multimedia tools to work smarter and hopefully avoid injury.
“The good thing is that Gabby’s body naturally is strong and flexible, and that’s kind of an odd mixture to find,” Carpenter said. “She has good genetics and a great attitude. That’s her — always bubbly and energetic. That’s part of what separates her from everyone else.”
But Douglas isn’t packing her bags for Rio just yet. First, she has to perform well at this week’s women’s nationals, which begin Friday. And then she has to perform even better at the United States Olympic trials early next month.
Martha Karolyi, the coordinator of the national team, is careful not to praise Douglas too highly at this point.
She said that when Douglas and Aly Raisman, another 2012 Olympic gold medalist trying to make the team for Rio, came back to national team camp, she sat them down and told them that she was glad to have them, but warned that they weren’t going to get any breaks.
It was a harsh message, yes. Karolyi can’t afford to be sentimental. The United States is the defending champion in the team event, so it was no wonder Karolyi remained straight-faced as she discussed Douglas this week.
“She is an ambitious girl, strong and very talented girl,” she said. “Her body is looking very nicely at her age. She has a lot of things going for her.”
One of those things is her attitude. Douglas is upbeat for someone who knows she won’t be the No. 1 American in the Olympics — if she makes it there at all.
There’s not much to debate: Biles is much better than she is, and it is Biles who is on the cusp of being the sweetheart at these coming Games.
Douglas doesn’t seem jealous. This week, she said that she was simply making time to soak up the moment.
In training for the nationals, she said she stood on the balance beam and took a second to consider the big picture.
“It’s amazing to be considered one of the best again, and it’s kind of overwhelming,” she said. “It’s like, wow, I’m on TV and people recognize me on the street and I could be going to another Olympics. I know this is truly special, it really is.”

