The Supreme Court’s decision to strike down parts of a restrictive abortion law in Texas rippled through the presidential campaign after its release on Monday, with Democrats and Republicans looking to rally voters with reminders that the future of the court was at stake in November.
The next president looks to have at least one and potentially several vacancies to fill in the next four years, and Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump have both warned that the fate of laws on immigration, guns and abortion will probably be determined by who gets to fill those openings.
Mrs. Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee, seized on the court’s ruling to warn that Mr. Trump, her presumptive Republican opponent, poses a threat to women. She recalled his suggestion this year that abortion be banned and that women who violate that ban be penalized. She also said that with other states also seeking to restrict access to abortions and with Republicans seeking to defund Planned Parenthood, proponents of abortions rights could not afford to let up.
“We’ve seen a concerted, persistent attack on women’s health and rights at the federal level,” Mrs. Clinton said in a statement. “Meanwhile, Donald Trump has said women should be punished for having abortions.”
Mr. Trump has since retracted his assertion that women should be punished for having abortions, but the re-emergence of the issue is likely to put him on the defensive because of his previous position in support of abortion rights.
Still, the Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt decision added urgency to many Republicans’ desire to keep Mrs. Clinton from winning the presidency. Mr. Trump has used the prospect of liberal justices filling the court to compel skeptical Republicans to back him, and on Monday, the Republican National Committee echoed that argument.
“The next president will likely appoint multiple justices to the Supreme Court that could determine its course for decades to come,” said Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee. “We must always fight to protect life, and today’s disappointing decision is another reminder of what’s at stake in this election and why we can’t afford to let Hillary Clinton win.”

