Amanda Kelly Rice and Eli Noam Savit were married on June 25 at the National Press Club in Washington. Judge David S. Tatel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit officiated, with assistance from two Supreme Court justices, Elena Kagan and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
The bride, 30, is an associate in the Detroit office of the law firm Jones Day. She graduated magna cum laude from Tulane and has a law degree cum laude from Harvard.
She is a daughter of Regina Kelly Rice of Fairfax Station, Va., and Mark C. Rice of La Cañada Flintridge, Calif.
The groom, 33, is a senior adviser and counsel to Detroit’s mayor, Mike Duggan. The groom graduated magna cum laude from Kalamazoo College and received a law degree magna cum laude from the University of Michigan. He is on the board of FLY Children’s Art Center in Ypsilanti, Mich., an arts outreach program for underserved schools.
He is a son of Kathleen A. Savit and Robert S. Savit of Ann Arbor, Mich.
The couple met in July 2012 at a friend’s birthday party in Washington shortly before Ms. Rice was to begin a clerkship with Judge Tatel and while Mr. Savit was working an extra month for the judge after completing his clerkship.
“We were spellbound by each other,’’ Mr. Savit said. She asked for advice and tips on the clerkship and then they moved on to other topics. “I couldn’t stop thinking about how gorgeous she was and how much chemistry we had.”
After the party, they went to a bar and he walked her home. Their romance blossomed at the courthouse in the weeks that followed, where they began making any excuse to visit each other’s office.
But they wanted to keep their relationship a secret from their colleagues in the judge’s chambers, going as far as to wear thinly-veiled disguises — stick-on mustaches and hats — on a date to the National Zoo in Washington.
Despite all their efforts, “I suspect that they knew,” Mr. Savit said.
A year later, in January 2014, after they moved in together, they both landed clerkships at the Supreme Court — she with Justice Kagan and he with Justice Ginsburg and retired Justice Sandra Day O’Connor.
“It’s an all-encompassing job,” he said, adding that they would talk to each other about various cases.
In April 2015, on the last day of arguments for their Supreme Court clerkships, he persuaded Ms. Rice, who had told him she had too much work to do, to walk up the marble steps in front of the Supreme Court with him, instead of using their usual side entrance, and to look out together at the mall. At the top of the staircase, he proposed.
After their term ended, they embarked on a five-month journey that included a camel safari in India and a stay with a tribe of reindeer herders in Northern Mongolia.
“It was certainly quite a change from the marble halls of the Supreme Court,” she said.
At the couple’s wedding, Justice Kagan and Justice Ginsburg, who are quite used to issuing opinions regarding the law of the land, this time affixed their signatures to a more personal document — the ketubah, the Jewish wedding contract.

