RE: SEGREGATION
Nikole Hannah-Jones wrote about sending her daughter to a segregated, low-income school in New York and the question of which children benefit from a separate and unequal school system.
“Worlds Apart” evokes a great deal of admiration for the author and her husband’s commitment to sending their child to a segregated, low-income public school, and it justifiably indicts the N.Y.C. administrations that have continuously failed to implement a citywide integration plan. As a result, as Hannah-Jones states, “New York City public schools are among the most segregated in the country.” The countless minority children who were and are being denied the educational opportunities provided to racially and economically privileged children should be entitled to reparations. Edward Kopelson, Montclair, N.J.
In Hannah-Jones’s survey of public schools in her neighborhood, she seems to deliberately overlook the existence of public charter schools in Bedford-Stuyvesant. That includes three Success Academy schools — including the one I run.
Hannah-Jones writes, “Not surprisingly, the test scores of most of Bed-Stuy’s schools reflect the marginalization of their students.” This is not true of my school. Her rock-bottom expectations for the public-education system shock and depress me. I do not believe a school full of poor black and brown children means that they will underperform on tests and are unable to compete with the most elite schools in the city; in fact, my school proves that this is possible.
I would invite Hannah-Jones to visit Success Academy Bed-Stuy 1, nestled between the Tompkins and Marcy housing projects, serving K-4. Of more than 400 students, only two are white and four are Asian. About eight of 10 students come from low-income families, and 13 percent are homeless. Out of the 149 students who completed statewide testing assessments last year, 83 percent passed the assessment for English language arts, and 99 percent passed for math, with 97 percent of them scoring at Level 4, the most advanced score.
What communities need most, even more than socioeconomic integration, are world-class schools. We are proving what is possible in Bed-Stuy and neighborhoods like it. Javeria Khan, Principal, Success Academy Bed-Stuy 1, Brooklyn
I was moved to tears by Hannah-Jones’s brilliant article. I grew up in a racially mixed, middle-class neighborhood that borders on a poor Latino neighborhood. My white parents, unlike most of their peers, chose to send me to the local elementary school, which was 95 percent nonwhite, and eight out of 10 children qualified for free or reduced-fee lunch.
My education did not suffer as a result of being exposed to so many poor, minority children — like P.S. 307, my school had a fantastic principal and wonderful teachers. Yes, being the only white kid in homeroom was sometimes uncomfortable and isolating — similar, I suspect, to how black and Latino kids feel when they are asked to “diversify” mostly white schools. No child likes feeling like an outlier. But maybe I would have felt less like an outlier had more of the white families in my neighborhood sent their kids to my school. Lauren Teixeira, Silver Spring, Md.
RE: PTSD
Robert F. Worth wrote about a new study that suggests PTSD has more physical causes than was previously thought.
As a Vietnam veteran, I am troubled when I read yet another story about post-traumatic stress. In the spring of 1981, the Veterans Administration in Rochester gathered a group of us to watch ABC’s “20/20,” where Barbara Walters and Hugh Downs discussed PTSD, which none of us had heard about or been treated for. From World War I’s “shell shock” to World War II’s “battle fatigue” to later wars’ “PTSD,” no one really seems to have a handle on how to treat these individual effects of war.
Today’s article just seems like more of the same: new theories for an age-old condition. What to do with people whose bowels have emptied in fear and who have witnessed and participated in deadly battle and were told to be brave and to suck it up and keep going no matter what (and were taught as kids that God and Moses said “Thou shall not kill”)?
It is hard after all these years to let go of the fear and anger and even guilt of wartime service, whatever the original cause, physical or psychological. Bruce W. Rider, Grapevine, Tex.

