In the debate over beards in business settings, the New York Police Department officially stands opposed, with limited exceptions for officers seeking a medical or religious accommodation.
The department's no-beard policy, as it is known, is at the center of a federal class-action lawsuit filed on Wednesday on behalf of a Muslim police officer who says he was suspended during the fasting month of Ramadan for refusing to shave his one-inch beard. The lawsuit, brought by Masood Syed, 32, aims to force the Police Department to change a policy that his lawyers say infringes on the rights of more than 100 officers seeking to exercise their religious freedoms without fear of discrimination or retaliation.
Officer Syed, a 10-year veteran assigned to the office that handles disciplinary proceedings against officers, was suspended without pay on Tuesday. At an emergency hearing on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge P. Kevin Castel ordered the department to continue paying Officer Syed until his next court date on July 8, when the court will decide whether he can return to work.
“It's frustrating because it's a city that's supposed to represent us,” Luna Droubi, a lawyer for Officer Syed, said. “This is New York City. Yet here they are telling people of different faiths that they can't protect and serve, that they can't be officers of the law because they're different.”
The Police Department has said that the rule is necessary for the safety of its officers. Lawrence Byrne, the department's deputy commissioner for legal matters, said the policy helped prevent officers from being overcome in physical confrontations and met federal guidelines for the gas masks that officers would use in a chemical or biological attack.
“We remain the No. 1 terrorist target in the world,” Mr. Byrne said. “And we need to have all 36,000 of our officers able to respond.”
Officer Syed, of Queens, is a Pakistani-American who wears a beard in obeisance to his Sunni Islamic faith. He joined the department as a transit patrol officer in 2006, and was granted an exception to the no-beards policy, according to his complaint.
The exception allows police officers, like those with skin conditions worsened by shaving or whose faiths require facial hair, to grow the hair up to one millimeter in length. But there are officers who wear their beards longer, including some assigned to undercover roles.
Officer Syed said he wore his beard at lengths between a half-inch and one inch without incident until 2015, and was allowed to wear it in a photo taken for his official identification.
He enrolled in New York Law School in 2010 and became a law clerk in the office of the deputy commissioner of trials at the Police Department. In 2011, he was required to sign a form agreeing not to wear his beard longer than one millimeter, but he continued to wear it longer.
According to the complaint, he was not reproached until August 2015, when he ran into Captain James F. Kobel, the second-in-command of the department's Equal Employment Opportunity office, at work. Captain Kobel told him he was not in compliance with the department's no-beard policy. What followed, Officer Syed said, was a series of meetings with officials, who repeatedly instructed him to shave his beard.
But he refused, and in December he sent a letter to Captain Kobel's boss, Deputy Commissioner Neldra M. Zeigler, requesting a “reasonable accommodation” for himself and other officers who wear beards longer than the current exception in observance of their faith.
On June 20, while his request was still pending, Officer Syed received a letter from Captain Kobel ordering him to shave by the end of the next day or face suspension, according to the complaint. When he did not comply on June 21, according to the complaint, he was ordered to turn over his gun and shield and was escorted from the building as his colleagues looked on.
“Every officer knows what that means,” Officer Syed said, adding, “I was extremely humiliated.”
Officer Syed's complaint cites a 2013 ruling in Federal District Court in favor of a Hasidic Jewish police officer who was fired during his probationary period for refusing to shave his beard. The officer, Fishel Litzman, was reinstated in 2014 and remains on the job.
The complaint also describes another 2013 case of Mohsin Aftab, a Muslim police officer who was suspended and ultimately agreed to leave the department after 10 years of service rather than shave his beard. Mr. Aftab, according to the complaint, has not been able to work in law enforcement since his departure, and his family has had to accept food stamps.

