BUFFALO — Once upon a time, N.H.L. origin stories resounded, like a slap shot in an empty arena, with familiar tropes. They started on, say, frozen ponds and backyard rinks in Boston or Toronto, Detroit or Minneapolis. South meant St. Louis. West was Alberta and British Columbia.
But the expansion of the league and the relocation of N.H.L. franchises to fresh precincts, which continued with an announcement this week that a Las Vegas club will begin play in the 2017-18 season, have resulted in creating hockey incubators in parts of the United States not normally associated with ice.
On Friday, at the N.H.L. draft here at the First Niagara Center, the Toronto Maple Leafs are expected to use the No. 1 pick to select Auston Matthews, a 6-foot-2, 210-pound center from Scottsdale, Ariz., who played professionally for the Zurich Lions of the Swiss League last season.
Soon after, another club will call Jakob Chychrun of Boca Raton, Fla., the highest-rated defenseman among North American skaters, according to N.H.L. Central Scouting, a league department that ranks prospects for the draft.
“It’s the result of expansion, whether it be expansion to the Florida area, expansion to the West Coast — Los Angeles, San Jose or Arizona,” said Lou Lamoriello, who is overseeing his first draft as general manager of the Maple Leafs after more than 25 years in a similar capacity with the Devils. “It’s the result and exposure of different leagues and organizations that have developed, and also the job that USA Hockey has done with the program.”
As the N.H.L. has expanded and relocated to the West and the South, there has been a resulting uptick in players from those formerly remote outposts.
From 1924 to 1939, when the N.H.L.’s American franchises were primarily in Boston, Chicago, New York, Pittsburgh and Detroit, American-born players came from 14 states.
Today, the N.H.L. is a 30-team league, with 23 clubs in the United States — including two in Florida, three in California and one apiece in Texas and Arizona. American players from 2000 to 2015 came from 35 states, including California, Arizona and Texas.
Pat Kelleher, who oversees membership for USA Hockey, the nation’s governing body for amateur hockey, said diffusion of the sport to nontraditional areas is seeded by the N.H.L.
“First and foremost has been the N.H.L. clubs that have gone there, and then the world of hockey grows around it,” Kelleher said. Teams build rinks, he said, “and the ecosystem builds up around them.”
Teams in warm-weather cities have had success on the ice, if not always in the accounting ledger. In the 15 seasons since the N.H.L. last expanded, in 2000-01, nine Stanley Cup finals series have featured a team from California, Florida or North Carolina.
The Arizona Coyotes and the Florida Panthers, among others, have had financial and attendance difficulties, but their areas have produced top prospects in one generation, showing another way expansion has helped grow the game.
USA Hockey reached record membership in 2014-15, the latest period for which figures are available. Although membership continues to edge upward in hockey hotbeds like Minnesota and Massachusetts, some of the fastest growth has come from the Sun Belt, including 7,329 registered players in Arizona.
Although only a fraction of the 26,383 players in California, and slightly more than half those in Florida, the figure represents a 37 percent increase in registration from 2003, when Matthews, inspired by the N.H.L. team in town, began playing hockey in the Phoenix area.
“It was the Coyotes, for sure,” he said.
In 1996, the year before Matthews was born, the Winnipeg Jets relocated from Manitoba to Arizona and were renamed the Coyotes. Matthews attended his first game at age 3 with his uncle Billy, who had season tickets.
“That was the first time I saw it,” said Matthews, whose father, Brian, played baseball and whose mother, Ema, is of Mexican heritage, “and I fell in love with it from the beginning.”
Matthews credits his early development, in part, to the influence of the skating instructor Boris Dorozhenko and Ron Filion, a former minor league player. Filion coached Matthews for four years on the Arizona Bobcats, a youth hockey organization that plays at the AAA level, the highest.
Originally from Quebec, Filion, 50, arrived in Phoenix when hired as coach and general manager of the Roadrunners, a minor league team. Tired of a professional life in the minors, he began coaching youth hockey players, beginning with Brendan Lemieux, the son of Claude Lemieux, a wing who won the Stanley Cup with three different teams during a 20-year N.H.L. career.
That is when Filion first encountered Matthews, a boy — known to friends, family and teammates as Papi — who loved to score.
With elite competition scarce in the Southwest, the Bobcats fly to 10 tournaments per year in places like Minnesota, Detroit and Chicago. The cost to parents for travel and fees can be up to $20,000, Filion said. By some measures, it has paid off.
“When we started with the 97s, the Matthews group, we got our butt kicked pretty much everywhere we went,” he said. “Two years later, we were ninth in the country.”
Still, by the time they are teenagers, many elite players in the Sun Belt must head north to hone their game. At 16, Matthews moved to Michigan to join other top prospects from around the country as part of USA Hockey’s National Team Development Program.
What Sun Belt teams lack in access to rinks and elite competition at home, they compensate for with coaching, said Alex Hicks, an assistant for the Arizona State University men’s team, which begins play as a full-fledged N.C.A.A. Division I member next season in yet another measure of hockey’s growth in the South and West.
A Calgary native, Hicks played 258 games in the N.H.L. as a forward for Anaheim, Pittsburgh, San Jose and Florida. He retired to Phoenix in 2006, his three children played hockey and he got involved coaching youth teams.
“No question, the biggest driver is the coaching the kids get,” he said about the Sun Belt’s recent success. “There’s not a ton of youth players here — around 4,000 — but the quality of coaching is fantastic because of N.H.L. guys, or guys who played in college, who’ve retired here.”
It is the same in California and Florida, where Chychrun was coached by his father, Jeff, a defenseman from Canada who played parts of eight seasons in the N.H.L. before moving to Boca Raton in the mid-1990s.
Jakob Chychrun, a strapping 6-2 and 220 pounds, played for the Florida Junior Panthers until moving to Canada in high school to pursue junior hockey, where he plays in the Ontario Hockey League for the Sarnia Sting.
Chychrun is not the first elite defenseman from the Florida Junior Panthers, though. Shayne Gostisbehere, from Pembroke Pines, Fla., scored 17 goals and 46 points as a dazzling Philadelphia Flyers rookie during the 2015-16 season. He finished second to Artemi Panarin of the Chicago Blackhawks in voting for the Calder Trophy, given to the N.H.L.’s rookie of the year.
“He was a really good skater from the first time I saw him,” said Ray Sheppard, 50, a right wing from Ontario who scored 357 N.H.L. goals, and served as Gostisbehere’s coach with the Junior Panthers for four seasons until Gostisbehere left Florida to attend prep school in Connecticut. “He was natural at thinking the game. If you can think the game, chances are you’ll be successful at it.”
The Panthers arrived as an N.H.L. expansion team to Florida in 1993, making Gostisbehere and Chychrun among the first generation raised on hockey in the Sunshine State.
“Should they be surprised?” Sheppard said about Northerners wondering how some of the draft’s top prospects wound up from Arizona and Florida. “No. There are a tremendous amount of good athletes.”
Perhaps in 20 years, no one will be fazed by Nevada-born players making their way onto N.H.L. rosters, now that Las Vegas is on the hockey map.
Bet on it.

