LONDON — Battle lines have been sharply drawn ahead of the vote on Thursday about whether Britain should remain a member of the European Union.
The intense debate over the referendum, widely known by its shorthand, “Brexit,” has pitted neighbors and relatives against one another.
It has spilled over to Twitter, where in moments of tension users often turn to pet memes.
Last week, Lilian Edwards, a law professor in Scotland, posted a picture of her cat on Twitter, curled up on a pillow and looking slightly sad, and added the hashtag #CatsAgainstBrexit, asking other cat owners to join her.
Soon thousands of cat owners who support British membership in the bloc posted pictures of their cats in a purportedly resentful or irritated state, attributing their dark mood to Brexit-induced depression. Never mind that cats are inscrutable.
More hashtags proliferated: the opposing #CatsForBrexit, as well as #DogsAgainstBrexit and #DogsForBrexit. Even hamsters and ferrets weighed in.
So far, the cats opposed to leaving the European Union are winning the battle, with nearly 60,800 tweets in the last seven days, according to Dataminr, a monitoring service. Cat tweets in favor of leaving the European Union numbered around 2,700, with the dog tweets split 3,475 against to 1,360 for leaving, Dataminr showed.
What does this mean for the referendum? We’re not sure, but this is scientific proof that Twitter is ridiculous.
Through their pets, Twitter users touched on several high-profile issues of the referendum debate, including immigration, the economy and the role of the right-wing U.K. Independence Party.
“Benson’s worried not enough people realize that we have more in common than things dividing us,” wrote Rupert Myers, a journalist, on Twitter, with a picture of his cat gazing forlornly (or perhaps at a goldfish).
Immigration figured prominently in the posts, a reflection of the “Leave” campaign’s views, which recently made headlines after a poster showed a huge line of migrants stretching into the distance, with the words “Breaking Point” overlaid in red.
“Sasha is worried for her future after #Brexit as she knows she looks ‘foreign,’ ” wrote Paul Bernal on Twitter, posting a picture of a cat.
And so the battle of the Twitter pets is likely continue until the vote. A sampling:
Hypnosis is one way to get results.
Prayer is another method.
This one is not quite sure which way to vote.
For those who oppose leaving the European Union:
When the two sides face off, this is what it looks like:
Dr. Suzanne Conboy-Hill, referring to Boris Johnson, the former London mayor and one of the public faces of the “Leave” campaign, said her cat feared she could be sent packing at any moment: “Chaka is 19 & part Persian. She worries she might be deported if Boris knows where Persia is.”
On the other side of the debate, Daniel Hannan, a member of the Conservative Party and the European Parliament, invoked the famed Grumpy Cat.

