Rob Refsnyder has been using Dustin Ackley's first baseman's glove for the past few weeks while he breaks in one of his own.
Despite driving in the go-ahead run in the Yankees' 5-3 win over the Minnesota Twins on Friday night at Yankee Stadium, Refsnyder's opportunities to loosen up his leather may be waning.
On Saturday, Mark Teixeira will be activated from the disabled list, according to Manager Joe Girardi, and first base will finally become his domain. Whether that is the best outcome for the Yankees, who have had Sisyphean difficulty climbing above .500, is debatable.
Refsnyder has manned the position for the majority of Teixeira's recovery from torn cartilage in his right knee. This month, Refsnyder, who had never played first base at the major league level before Teixeira was injured on June 3, has hit .286.
Come Saturday though, Refsnyder could be back on his way to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.
“To have that bat, a switch-hitter, both sides, his Gold Glove defense, we need Tex back,” Refsnyder said.
In a corner of the Yankees' clubhouse reside the lockers of a cadre of first basemen: Teixeira, Ike Davis, Chris Parmelee and Refsnyder are crammed next to each other, akin to a freshman college dorm room.
This was not by design.
Friday marked the 24th game Teixeira has missed this year, one-third of a season in which the Yankees have floated near but not far above the .500 mark, though the win got them to 36-36. In Teixeira's extended absence, the Yankees have also tried Parmelee, who strained his right hamstring in his second start with the club, and Davis, who was not even on the roster two weeks ago.
Ackley, who had one of the first cracks at the position when Teixeira had neck spasms earlier this year, dislocated his right shoulder in May.
Davis is the best defensive option behind Teixeira, while Refsnyder is proving to be a capable major league hitter. After Refsnyder's sixth inning at-bat Friday, a flyout, Girardi brought in Davis as a defensive replacement.
Before the game, Girardi would not provide a hint about whom the Yankees might keep to back up Teixeira, who declined to have surgery on his knee and reasoned that a combination of rest, treatment and cortisone injections would allow it to recover and hold up for the rest of the season.
Teixeira's ardent desire to return may be admirable, but it is one that could be emanating from other factors. Teixeira, 36, will be a free agent after this season, and he would be better served trying to sell his services without the red flag of coming off season-ending surgery.
It could help that Teixeira will come back against the Twins, who have the worst record in baseball. The Twins committed three errors in the third and fourth innings, during which the Yankees scored four runs.
In the fourth, Refsnyder tagged a single to left field to bring in Didi Gregorius and put the Yankees ahead, 4-3. Twins starter Tommy Milone had been pitching Refsnyder away, but then challenged him inside with a fastball, which Refsnyder was able to turn on.
Refsnyder, who had recently been applying a more compact swing, has nine hits in his last 23 at-bats over the last seven games, which could leave Girardi with a tough decision to sleep on.
“I think it tells you a lot about the young man, to be able to say, ‘Hey, you're playing first base,' when he had never done it before, and to continue to be productive at the plate,” Girardi said.
Aside from Refsnyder, four other Yankees collected R.B.I., including Aaron Hicks, who hit a solo home run in the eighth inning against his former team.
Masahiro Tanaka struck out seven, but he also allowed three runs on seven hits. Tanaka departed after six innings and was followed by Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman, who combined for three perfect innings. Chapman struck out the side in the ninth.
The Yankees are 11-0 when all three pitchers appear in a game.

