CLEVELAND — About 92 hours had passed since the city secured its first major professional championship in 52 years, and here we were sitting together at Progressive Field, waiting for the Indians’ game to start and basking in the glow of a scoreboard that read, “Cleveland Cavaliers 2016 NBA Champions.”
My Cleveland sports hero is not LeBron James or Carlos Baerga or Bernie Kosar — although they have all been among my favorite players at some point — but my father, Dave, who raised his only child to be a die-hard fan, no matter how painful that could be at times.
Through the years he has dressed me in jerseys and T-shirts with names like Byner, Daugherty, Thome, Lofton, Couch, Swisher, Hillis and Manziel. Many of them still hang in my closet, some rendered useless by trades or general lack of productivity. That’s just the Cleveland way.
My face has been painted like a Browns helmet and I have worn “dawg tags,” a plastic dog nose and an orange-and-white trucker hat with a furry brown dog wearing a Browns headband on the front. Most children get Goofy hats at Walt Disney World. Not me. I liked it that way.
We went to games at Cleveland Municipal Stadium, Jacobs Field (now Progressive Field), Richfield Coliseum (the previous home of the Cavaliers) and Gund Arena (now Quicken Loans Arena). We even went to Wahoo Winterfest and Fuji Photo Day to get autographs from and pictures with our favorite stars. “Come on, Melissa, don’t be shy! Get in there!” he would yell as I stood sheepishly waiting for Andre Thornton, Pat Tabler, Joe Carter and the like. (In hindsight, this helped me tremendously when I became a sports journalist.)
Opening day was a holiday in the Hoppert household, and there was no better sight than Dad pulling into my grade school’s parking lot, ready to break me free. We went to the 19-inning Indians home opener in 1992, which lasted 6 hours 30 minutes, and sat through it all. That same season, we sneaked into seats behind home plate and my father went sprinting down a portal after a foul ball and came back with a mangled Walkman and a bruised knee. That week, our English teacher assigned us personal narratives: I documented the foul-ball adventure.
We were there for the final Indians game at Municipal Stadium, wearing T-shirts emblazoned with an image of the Chief Wahoo sign from atop Gate D and the words “The Last Hurrah.” We also were there in 1993 for the first game after Bill Belichick, the Browns’ coach at the time, cut Kosar, the homegrown quarterback who wore No. 19. We chanted “Bill Must Go!” with several hundred fans outside the doors to the Browns’ locker room. Belichick went on to lead the New England Patriots to four Super Bowl titles; the Browns have yet to win one. That’s just the Cleveland way.
The day Kosar was cut was not the darkest day in Cleveland sports history; that distinction belongs to Nov. 6, 1995, when the owner Art Modell announced he was moving the Browns to Baltimore. We joked with my father, who makes fuel pumps for jet aircraft and for years was a proud official in the United Auto Workers, that he lost half his wardrobe that day. He did not find that funny.
We were at the Browns’ final game at Municipal Stadium on Dec. 17, 1995. The Browns beat the Bengals, 26-10, but the victory had all the makings of a funeral. Advertisements were blacked out all around the stadium, and fans ripped out rows of seats to take home. In 2001, after the resurrected Browns began play at a new stadium, my father shielded me from plastic beer bottles being hurled onto the field from fans who were incensed by officials’ reviewing a play after another had already been run. The episode is now known as Bottlegate.
There were some happy times. From June 12, 1995, to April 4, 2001, the Indians sold out 455 consecutive home games, setting a major league record that was later broken by the Boston Red Sox. From 1995 to 1997, I was an usher at the ballpark and worked two World Series and an All-Star Game. By the 1997 playoffs, I was a freshman at Ohio State and would drive two and a half hours from Columbus to Cleveland to work the home games before driving right back. There was no way I was going to miss out on the park’s electric atmosphere.
I watched Game 7 from a sports bar in Columbus and could barely believe it when the Indians went into the ninth inning with a 2-1 lead against the Florida Marlins. But Jose Mesa allowed the Marlins to tie the score, and Edgar Renteria drove in the winning run in the 11th. My father watched the meltdown from his couch in Euclid, Ohio, and he called in sick and sat in the dark for days afterward, replaying it in his mind. That’s just the Cleveland way.
Then the Cavaliers secured the No. 1 overall pick in the 2003 draft and selected LeBron James, who had Clevelanders dreaming of a championship while he was slamming down dunks at St. Vincent-St. Mary High School in nearby Akron. The Chosen One, as they called him, was poised to lead us to the holy grail, but my father knew better. There were signs, he said, that James did not live and die with Cleveland — at least not yet. First, James wore a Yankees cap to an Indians division series game against the Yankees in 2007. A year later, James stood on the Cowboys’ sideline at Browns Stadium. As much as this irked my father, James was forgiven as long as he was wearing the wine and gold. Enter ESPN and “The Decision,” which stung worse than the Drive, the Fumble, the Shot and all the other lowlights because it was a man-made disaster.
My father continued to show his support for the Cavaliers, watching on TV and going to games, even as James led the Miami Heat to two titles. Then came July 11, 2014, when James, a free agent, announced in an online love letter to the city that he was coming home. For as much as it stung when James left, all was forgotten in the time it took to scroll to the bottom. But there was still one tough critic to convert — my father.
He left a voice mail message the next morning, and I knew right away that he, too, was smitten with James. I saved it and listened to it again this week: “We went to the Indians’ game last night. And I tell you, it was so much fun, electric. The whole downtown is just going crazy.” He added, citing the awarding of the Republican National Convention and the arrivals of Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel, Indians Manager Terry Francona and James, “So many good things are happening.”
He continued: “For a guy like me, that’s lived here all my life, to be the center of the sports world, it’s just amazing. Cleveland’s on the move. No more mistake on the lake, the river’s burning; that happened in the ‘60s, you know what I mean. The feeling’s surreal.”
He was wrong about Manziel’s resurrecting the Browns, but he was right about the rest. As we sat behind home plate Wednesday, the Indians were in first place in the American League Central. And on Sunday, James and the Cavaliers defeated the Golden State Warriors, 93-89, to become the first team to rally from a three-games-to-one deficit to win the N.B.A. finals — on Father’s Day.
Even before the game, something unusual was swirling in the air around Cleveland: hope. I was not going to miss the celebration should the sports gods finally decide to award a title to our blue-collar city. After Game 7, I met up with a former usher and we celebrated downtown. Still, one thing was missing, and so I texted my father: “Dad, I love you! I wish you were here. It’s INSANE.”
Now 61, he wrote from the comfort of his Barcalounger: “Words can’t describe how I feel. Surreal.”
In an instant, the Cleveland way had been transformed. We were winners now, and there was nothing left to do but call in sick and enjoy it.

