As the Yankees continue their long waltz around the .500 mark — one step forward, another sideways, and then back — the question being asked with increasing legitimacy is this: Will they become sellers or buyers at the Aug. 1 trade deadline?
It was a question that the owner Hal Steinbrenner danced around Monday night when he spoke briefly to reporters at a charity function in Midtown Manhattan.
“You know me,” he said. “I’m not big on hypotheticals. Let’s just see. I believe we’re going to be right smack in the middle of it come the end of July.”
On Tuesday night, the Yankees were right smack in the middle of one of their more ghastly performances of the season, losing to the Colorado Rockies, 8-4, at Yankee Stadium.
When Charlie Blackmon hit the first of his two home runs on the third pitch of the game, the latest dismal pitching performance by Ivan Nova was underway. It was accompanied by Carlos Beltran’s rare trifecta: one ball rolled under his glove in right field; another carried over his head; and he was thrown out trying to take second on a fly ball.
Reciting the litany of mistakes in full would only belabor the point, but the most salient one is that the defeat kept them six games behind Baltimore in the American League East.
So even though the Yankees (34-36) have played better since their dreadful start, a 26-20 record since May 3 has not moved them appreciably closer to first place. They were six and a half games behind Baltimore then.
General Manager Brian Cashman and Manager Joe Girardi echoed Steinbrenner’s sunny outlook before the game, but also acknowledged that it was no sure thing that the Yankees would consider themselves contenders as the deadline approaches.
“I hope this team declares itself in such a way, one way or the other, that it’s pretty damn obvious,” Cashman said, pausing to laugh as he sat in the first-base dugout. “And I use that word carefully because I’m sure the social media will jump on it — ‘Well, it’s pretty damn obvious to me.’ ”
He added: “I get it. I understand it. We’re not blind, but we also have to remain objective and recognize that some players certainly are capable of a lot more than they’ve produced thus far. There’s some time for them to prove that, and if they don’t, then there will be some interesting decisions to make.”
Those decisions would ultimately land in the lap of Steinbrenner, who had been loath to trade the free-agents-to-be Robinson Cano and David Robertson when the Yankees missed the playoffs in 2013 and 2014. But this team has few players that would keep fans coming through the turnstiles: Attendance has dipped to more than 8,000 per game below levels of 2010, when the Yankees were defending World Series champions in their second season in the new stadium.
And they are continuing to cede ground to the Mets. While another modest crowd turned out at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday night, the Mets were beating Kansas City in a World Series rematch at Citi Field.
While Cashman was not a seller at the trade deadline last year, the Yankees were not aggressive, either. Cashman deemed the prospects Luis Severino, Aaron Judge and Gary Sanchez as untouchable, while Toronto made go-for-broke deals for Troy Tulowitzki and David Price and zoomed past the Yankees over the final two months. But nearly a year later, all three prospects are still at Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.
If the Yankees become sellers, they have some pieces to move. Beltran, who is in the final year of his contract, has 18 home runs and 48 runs batted in, and he could be of interest to a contender looking to fortify its designated-hitter spot, such as Kansas City or Houston. If the Yankees are willing to move either of their two elite closers, Andrew Miller or Aroldis Chapman, there should be a long list of suitors, beginning with Washington.
Cashman, who described the Yankees as “always trying to live for today,” hoped more players could mirror the resurgence of third baseman Chase Headley and shortstop Didi Gregorius, who have hit much better in the last six weeks. Gregorius doubled and tripled Tuesday.
But designated hitter Alex Rodriguez, who came up with seven runners on base and drove in one, is hitting .216, and catcher Brian McCann, who followed up his two home runs in Sunday’s loss at Minnesota with three strikeouts, is mired at .219.
Nova, who has a 6.88 E.R.A. over his last six starts, has become emblematic of a starting rotation that has begun to backslide after a strong May.
The Yankees may get first baseman Mark Teixeira back soon. He began a three-game rehabilitation assignment Tuesday night at Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, but Teixeira is hitting .180 and has not homered in more than two months.
“Hal has belief in this club, I have belief in this club, but we have to go out and do it,” Girardi said. “Belief is not enough. You have to go out and produce.”

