OMAHA — Coastal Carolina, known for its elegant, Chaucer-inspired nickname, slugged its way to its first College World Series. The Chanticleers hit 94 home runs, the most in Division I, reflecting the coziness of a renovated home stadium as much as the flatter-seam baseball the N.C.A.A. introduced last season. The ball, which flies farther than the old one, increased scoring nationwide.
But something odd happened to the Chanticleers, and college baseball's resuscitated offense, when the College World Series began here at TD Ameritrade Park last weekend.
Although teams had hit eight home runs in 12 games through Friday night, scoring had dropped by more than two runs per game, to 5.91, from 8.38. The 54 runs through 10 games matched the lowest output in that span in College World Series history, tying 2014.
Teams were batting .224, 20 points worse than last year, and pitching to a 2.24 E.R.A., well below last year's 3.59. Three games had ended in shutouts, with Oklahoma State becoming the first team to win back-to-back 1-0 games at the event.
That revived complaints about the park and the incoming prevailing wind, which knocks down long drives between the alleys and permits outfielders to take away singles by playing shallower. Tuesday night, when Coastal Carolina lost, 6-1, to Texas Christian, Coach Gary Gilmore said the park played so big it was nearly impossible to come from behind.
“You get down three runs, you feel like you're down 23 runs, to be honest with you,” Gilmore said. “It's very difficult to try to manage exactly how to play in this park, having been in a completely different setting all year long.”
Coastal did come back Thursday night to oust Texas Tech, 7-5, in the losers' bracket, but it required three Tech errors and six unearned runs to do it. Four games in, the mighty Chanticleers had yet to hit a home run. They finally hit one Saturday night in a 7-5 victory over T.C.U., sending the Chanticleers to the final round.
Andrew Checketts, the coach at the University of California at Santa Barbara, sounded a note like Gilmore's after his team lost by 3-0 to Arizona on Wednesday night. “I actually made a similar comment before the game, that 1-0 feels like 5-0 because of the ballpark and the quality of the pitching,” he said.
It turns out that the new ball, introduced in 2015 to counteract metal bat restrictions that reduced offense from 2011 to 2014, did its job just about everywhere but here.
By 2014, scoring nationally had fallen to 5.08 runs per team per game, the lowest since metal bats replaced wood in 1974. With the new ball, it rose to 5.44 in 2015 and 5.55 this year through super regional play, according to the N.C.A.A. Home runs increased as well.
A problem the new ball can't fix is the direction TD Ameritrade faces. City and N.C.A.A. officials aligned the stadium to open toward the CenturyLink Center arena and the edge of downtown instead of a dreary warehouse district, never dreaming that the wind would affect play this much. The wind usually blew out at Rosenblatt Stadium, home of the College World Series from 1950 to 2010.
TD Ameritrade opened the same year that so-called Bbcor bats (for Ball-Bat Coefficient of Restitution), deadened to reduce exit velocity and better protect pitchers, came into use. Minnesota Coach John Anderson, formerly on the N.C.A.A. Division I baseball committee, said last year that the committee would have recommended shorter dimensions at TD Ameritrade had it known how drastically the Bbcor bats would affect ball flight. The fences are 335 feet down the lines, 375 in the alleys and 408 in center, the same as Rosenblatt. Spacious foul ground doesn't help.
“The whole place is built for pitching,” said T.C.U. Coach Jim Schlossnagle, whose team qualified the final season at Rosenblatt and the last three at TD Ameritrade. “If you have elite pitching, you can smother people. If you just have solid pitching, like I think we have, the ballpark takes you another step, because you can make some mistakes and they hang up in the middle of the field.”
A handful of players flashed power here. Florida first baseman Peter Alonso, a second-round draft pick by the Mets this month, cracked three long home runs the last two years.
The T.C.U. freshman Luken Baker, a 6-foot-4, 265-pound slugger, homered twice last week while going 5 for 8 in the Horned Frogs' first two games. Late comebacks are a College World Series tradition, and Baker's three-run ninth-inning homer last Sunday against Texas Tech delivered the only one so far, 5-3.
But mainly, pitching dominates. Five participants — Florida, T.C.U., Oklahoma State, Arizona and Coastal Carolina — ranked 31st or better nationally in earned run average; the first three were among the top 15.
“Strikes here really play, and they really give you a chance,” Checketts said. “The offense is diminished. Teams that can get the two-out hit and execute a little bit have a legitimate chance to be able to win. And three runs have a chance to feel like six if the guys coming out of the bullpen are throwing strikes.”
Schlossnagle advocates moving in the fences at TD Ameritrade and adoption by the N.C.A.A. of the livelier ball used in the minor leagues. Ron Prettyman, the N.C.A.A.'s managing director of championships since December, doubts either will happen.
“We're really not concerned about the offensive numbers and the equipment or the production,” Prettyman said. “We're wide open to talking about whatever's going to help the game, but we think the adjustments we've made with the Bbcor bat and the low-seam baseball have really done what we hoped it would do.”
He added: “We've had issues with the heavy air and the wind blowing in most of the time. That's something we're going to face as long as the ballpark faces the direction we're facing.”
Arizona Coach Jay Johnson argues that critics of TD Ameritrade are missing the point.
“I think there's something that's lost here in just talking about the ballpark,” he said. “You're talking about the eight teams in the country that are playing the best, and the only way you're here is if you're really pitching. And the pitching in this tournament is at an elite level right now. You throw this elite pitching into this ballpark, it's going to be 3-2, 3-0, 2-1, 1-0.”

