OMAHA — To those who have watched her swim circles around the competition, Katie Ledecky appears to have no peers in the pool. Ledecky, however, knows better.
At a meet outside Phoenix in April, she spotted Debbie Meyer, the woman she will probably be chasing at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro in August, and trundled over to say hello. Meyer greeted her with a hug and exclaimed: “You're great! Two, four, eight. Do it this summer!”
At the 1968 trials ahead of the Olympics in Mexico City, Meyer set world records in the 200, 400 and 800 freestyles. Two months after turning 16, she swept her events at the Summer Games to become the first swimmer to win three individual Olympic gold medals. No Olympian since has matched Meyer's 200-400-800 string of gold (the men contest the 1,500 meters instead of the 800).
Ledecky, 19, may be the one to finally match the feat.
She owns the fastest times in the world this year in the 200-, 400- and 800-meter freestyles. Aside from Michael Phelps, she was the only American swimmer who was No. 1 in the world in individual events in the 2015 year-end rankings. Ledecky's performance heading into the United States Olympic swimming trials, which began Sunday at CenturyLink Center, has turned Meyer, 63, into a time traveler. Suddenly, it seems like 1968 once more, with another teen queen preparing for her prom date with history.
Ledecky, who will enter Stanford in the fall, is far too humble to count her gold medals before they are won. But she indirectly declared her intentions to go after Meyer's record when she posted the sixth-fastest performance in history in the 200 freestyle at a competition in Texas in January. She already owns eight of the 10 top times in history in the 400 freestyle and nine of the 10 fastest swims ever in the 800.
Ledecky will begin her pursuit on Monday in the 400 meters at the Olympic trials.
Ledecky's lodestar is Janet Evans, who won the 400- and 800-meter freestyles (and the 400 individual medley) at the 1988 Summer Olympics and successfully defended her 800 title in 1992.
But Ledecky's remarkable range carries old-timers back further in time, to Meyer in the late 1960s and Shirley Babashoff in the first six years of the 1970s. In 1976, Babashoff came closest to matching Meyer, earning silvers in the 200, 400 and 800 freestyles behind East German competitors later found to have been part of a state-sponsored doping program (at the 1972 Munich Games, Australia's Shane Gould won the 200 and 400 and finished second in the 800).
Since upsetting Britain's Rebecca Adlington in the 800 freestyle at the 2012 London Games in her first international competition, Ledecky has held a python's grip on the women's distances. In this year's world rankings, she is almost four seconds faster than her nearest rival in the 400 and more than 11 seconds ahead of her closest competitor in the 800.
“I'm at a loss for words sometimes when I think about what she has been able to do the last four years,” said the Olympian Rowdy Gaines, an NBC swimming analyst, adding: “She loves to train. She loves to be out there every day and loves that feeling. You don't get that a lot, and I think that's really helped her.”
Meyer exerted an enormous influence on her heir apparent, though Ledecky was wholly unaware of it until they met in 2014. Ledecky and her older brother, Michael, inherited their love of the sport from their mother, Mary Gen, who was a teenage swimmer in North Dakota in 1968 when Meyer broke the American record in the 800-meter freestyle five times.
Ledecky's mother, a freestyler who went on to compete at the University of New Mexico, was beguiled by Meyer. She begged her parents to allow her to stay up to watch the telecast of the swimming at the Mexico City Games, where the women's 800 freestyle made its Olympic debut.
Ledecky was with her mother at a U.S.A. Swimming-related function when they ran into Meyer. Recalling their meeting, Meyer said Ledecky's mother seemed more excited than Ledecky. Nearly a half-century later, Meyer has been the one glued to the television, watching Ledecky develop into the most formidable all-around freestyler of her, or possibly any, generation.
“When I watch her swim, it brings back so many memories,” Meyer said.
She looks at Ledecky and sees an upgraded version of the swimming machine that she was as a teenager — an Apple MacBook Pro to Meyer's Honeywell kitchen computer. Like Ledecky, Meyer got her start in an East Coast recreational swimming league and later was known for taking her races out fast, treating whatever distance she was racing as a sprint.
Like Ledecky, Meyer was spurred on in training by a male teammate who was also an Olympian. And as Ledecky aspires to do, Meyer emerged as the bright star of an Olympics with a first-time host, in a city whose preparation for the Games was fraught with problems.
“There are a lot of similarities,” Meyer said.
In 1965, Meyer's father was transferred to California, and Meyer, then 12, joined Arden Hills, in Sacramento, the training base for a handful of top-level swimmers, as Nation's Capital Swim Club, where Ledecky trains, has become.
Meyer's coach, Sherm Chavoor, held practices twice a day and used a stopwatch in lieu of a pace clock. He trained his swimmers to take races out hard and hold the pace. Mike Burton, a three-time Olympic champion, was the one everybody followed.
Five years older than Meyer, he would become the first man to surpass 16 minutes for the 1,650-yard free, the first to break 8:30 in the 800-meter freestyle and the first man to win consecutive 1,500 freestyle Olympic crowns.
Meyer idolized Burton, nicknamed Mr. Machine because of his ability to grind out mileage. She doggedly chased him when he returned home from U.C.L.A., to train. Eventually she progressed to where she could catch him and, on occasion, beat him.
“I could not wait for him to get back from college,” Meyer said. “I would get in the lane right next to him so I could race him.”
In a telephone interview, Burton recalled Meyer breaking world records in practice.
“She was very, very tough, just a very hard worker,” he said. “Every practice, I was just trying my damnedest to stay ahead of her.”
Ledecky's pacesetter is Andrew Gemmell, who finished ninth in the 1,500-meter freestyle at the 2012 Olympics. A couple of times a week, Ledecky said, she and Gemmell go head-to-head in training.
“It keeps me honest,” Gemmell said before a swim meet in May in Atlanta.
They do not go head-to-head every day. The practices run by Gemmell's father, Bruce, the head coach of Nation's Capital, reflect the era. The over-distance emphasis popularized by Chavoor and his ilk has been replaced by shorter sets performed at race pace.
Instead of trudging through repeats of 800 meters, which Meyer did routinely, Ledecky is more apt to swim a set of eight 100s, each at race speed.
As often as not, she is likely to swim in the same lane as Gemmell and start 10 seconds after him, leaving them both to race the clock.
“I've had a lot of fun training with Andrew the last couple of years, even if I'm not directly racing him in a practice,” Ledecky said, adding, “It's great to have an elite distance swimmer there — somebody that's been to the Olympics and has experienced the same thing and is working toward the same goals as I am.”
The Mexico City Olympics, the first Games to be held in Latin America, took place during a tumultuous time in history. In the months before, there were pro-democracy student demonstrations that turned violent, with dozens, perhaps hundreds killed during one protest less than two weeks before the Games. Others stridently voiced their disapproval over the exorbitant amounts of money being spent on sports facilities while Mexico's social problems worsened.
Meyer recalled sitting down with a piece of pie à la mode one night and watching the NBC program “The Huntley-Brinkley Report.” One of the anchors, she recalled, mentioned the possibility that the 1968 Olympics could be canceled, and Meyer said she immediately lost her appetite.
“I sat up straight in the chair,” she said. “I didn't know what to think.”
Many people aren't sure what to think about the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, the first Games to be held in South America, which are also taking place during a tumultuous time in history.
Brazil's president is facing impeachment, the country's economy is in a tailspin, global public-health officials are worried about the spread of the Zika virus, and polluted bodies of water slated for use during the Olympic competition present another health risk. For all these reasons, there have been calls to cancel or postpone these Summer Games.
“When you're watching the news and it comes up, I sometimes listen,” Ledecky said.
The dire reports, she added, do not give her pause.
“Each Olympics seems to have different things that could be thrown our way,” she said. “We just have to do the best we can to prepare.”
So Ledecky resolutely forges ahead, training her focus on what she can control. Swimming is a solitary sport, especially when one's main competition is the clock. But Ledecky does not feel alone as she prepares to set the table at the trials for a 200, 400 and 800 feast in Rio.
It inspires her to know Meyer is following her progress.
“To know that the person who did it is supporting me as I go to the Olympic trials,” Ledecky said, “that's cool.”

