Terry Collins did not want to acknowledge the Mets’ latest injury. He was about to walk back to the clubhouse after his postgame news conference when a Mets spokesman reminded him of the reality.
Fans already knew that Yoenis Cespedes, the Mets’ best hitter, had left Wednesday’s 4-3 victory over the Kansas City Royals in the sixth inning with discomfort in his left wrist. But they did not yet know that Noah Syndergaard, the Mets’ best starter this season, was with Cespedes at the doctor’s office because of discomfort in his right elbow and was not waiting in the clubhouse to speak with reporters.
“His elbow flared up on him,” Collins, the Mets’ manager, said of Syndergaard before leaving. “That’s why we took him out of the game.”
Nothing about this Mets season has been easy. But late Wednesday, the Mets announced relatively good results about the players, two of the team’s most important.
Syndergaard, who overcame similar symptoms a month ago, had discomfort in the back of his right elbow, but a magnetic resonance imaging test revealed no structural damage. He was given anti-inflammatory medicine and was cleared to resume his normal workout routine, the team said.
Cespedes was found to have a mild wrist sprain. He received a cortisone shot and is listed as day to day, the team announced. It was unclear when either player would return to action, but for a team that has seemed snakebitten, the developments were positive. Syndergaard and Cespedes will join the Mets in Atlanta on Thursday, when the team begins a four-game series against the Braves.
“It’s not that much fun,” Collins said of the Mets’ eventful and injury-plagued season. “I’d rather come and have a normal day once in a while. But it’s what the business is.”
The Mets also announced that starter Zack Wheeler, who was aiming for a return from Tommy John surgery in the second half of the season, had nerve irritation in his right elbow. With no structural problems, Wheeler also received a cortisone shot and can return to baseball activities when he is ready.
On Wednesday, Syndergaard’s velocity was the same as usual. He allowed three runs on eight hits but struck out only four in six innings. He coughed up a lead for the second time in the sixth but was still throwing 98 miles per hour to the final batter he faced.
“He pitched great,” catcher Rene Rivera said. He added, in light of Syndergaard’s elbow trouble: “His sinker was moving a lot. This wind was helping a lot. His breaking ball was there. That’s why I didn’t know anything about it.”
In the fifth inning, Cespedes grimaced after fouling off a pitch. He drew a walk and stayed in the game after Collins and a trainer checked on him. But he did not take the field in the sixth.
“Any time when you’re a hitter, and a big hitter, and your hands or wrists have problems, it’s a concern,” Collins said.
Like Syndergaard, Cespedes went to the Hospital for Special Surgery to see David Altchek, the Mets’ medical director, so he, too, was unavailable after the game. But Cespedes, who went 2 for 2 in his abbreviated stint, left a brief statement through an interpreter.
Foreshadowing the team’s announcement Wednesday night, Cespedes said in the statement that he was not worried, that he was unsure what had caused the wrist pain and that he had told the Mets he did not think he should push it.
“We’ve got to keep the heads up,” shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera said. “We know that happens in this game, and we’ve got to keep fighting every day with the guys we got right now.”
Cabrera, the rookie Matt Reynolds and the bullpen saved the Mets in the second game of their two-game set with the Royals, who defeated the Mets last year in the World Series. Cabrera scored the Mets’ first run with an acrobatic slide after a James Loney single in the fourth inning. His two-run homer in the fifth gave the Mets a lead, and his stellar backhanded defensive play in the eighth saved a run.
“This is a long season,” Cabrera said. “We’ve got ups and downs. We’ve got to keep doing what we’re doing. The last few weeks, we didn’t do really well. But we’ve got to forget about it and keep working hard.”
Once Syndergaard told the Mets about his elbow, he was pulled after having thrown 91 pitches. Reliever Jerry Blevins took over in the seventh inning and notched his 21st appearance without allowing a run. He was followed by scoreless outings from Addison Reed and Jeurys Familia; Familia has recorded saves in all 24 of his opportunities this season.
After a wild pitch by Syndergaard helped lead to a game-tying run in the sixth, a backup saved the day for the Mets. With the left-hander Danny Duffy on the mound, the right-handed-hitting Reynolds started in left field instead of Michael Conforto.
A middle infielder by trade, Reynolds had never played the outfield in professional baseball, but he has shagged fly balls there in spring training and during batting practice.
Reynolds’s day in the field was unadventurous, but he made a difference with his bat in the sixth inning by smashing his first major league home run, an opposite-field shot that gave the Mets the lead for good.
“It’s not ideal to have players go down every single day,” Reynolds said. “But we’ve got a strong group of guys in here that never stop, and we’re going to keep playing together and play hard.”

