On a recent Saturday night in Miami, the modern Asian restaurant Pao at the Faena Hotel Miami Beach (faena.com/miami-beach) sizzled. A well-dressed crowd filled the circular space, while gaping at the half-red, half-gold Damien Hirst unicorn sculpture towering over the room on a gold pedestal.
There was even more action in the largest of the hotel’s five bars, the Living Room. There, the rich red tones juxtaposed with animal print fabrics exuded glamour, and glitterati clutched colorful cocktails and champagne flutes while eyeing the happening scene. Maybe they hoped for a star sighting? Leonardo DiCaprio, Madonna and Rita Ora had recently been at the hotel. Who would show on this night? As the evening wore on, the line outside the bar swelled.
If the hotel wasn’t the epicenter of Miami that night, it seemed to come close. In fact, if Alan Faena, the Argentine co-owner, has his way, the property and surrounding blocks in the city’s Mid-Beach neighborhood would have this level of buzz all the time.
Mr. Faena, an entrepreneur from Buenos Aires, and his business partner, the New York-based Len Blavatnik, are transforming the area’s faded hotels and condominiums into the Faena district, a six-block project that comprises the 169-room hotel, the 50-room hotel Casa Claridge’s, three condominium buildings, a cultural center and a retail complex. Mr. Blavatnik is financing the $1.2 billion venture, while Mr. Faena serves as the creative mind.
The Faena district, which received official designation as a Miami Beach district in late 2014, is a 10-minute walk north of South Beach and the centerpiece of Mid-Beach’s emerging status as a hot destination.
While the Faena district may be a big driver in the Mid-Beach face-lift, it has received help from a couple of new see-and-be-seen hotels. The Confidante, a 380-room midcentury-inspired property, entered the neighborhood with a splash as the Thompson Miami Beach in November 2014. And last December, the buzz around the beachfront hotel was amplified when the “Top Chef” alum Dale Talde opened a third outpost of his Asian-American establishment, Talde, inside the hotel.
One month after the Thompson came the Miami Beach Edition. The three-and-a-half-acre resort, from the hotelier Ian Schrager, stands out for its entertainment area, with a bowling alley, ice rink and nightclub. Jean-Georges Vongerichten, whose namesake restaurant has the highest ratings given by The New York Times and Michelin, is heading up the Edition’s food and beverage program and overseeing the resort’s two restaurants: the casual Italian-inspired Market at Edition and the fine-dining Matador Room, offering modern Latin cuisine.
Before any of these see-and-be-seen hotels came to Mid-Beach, the neighborhood was already getting a pop with the Broken Shaker, a cocktail bar that opened in 2012 at a hostel called Freehand Miami and continues to be a mainstay spot for the cool crowd.
For Mr. Faena, the area’s potential for reinvention was crystal clear from the outset. “This prime part of Miami with the most beautiful beach was sitting there undeveloped,” he said, wearing his signature off-white suit and Panama hat as he surveyed the glossy crowd in his namesake hotel.
He and Mr. Blavatnik have collaborated since 2000 when they started reviving the abandoned docklands of Puerto Madero in Buenos Aires into what is now one the city’s most attractive neighborhoods. It includes a cultural quarter, residences and a hotel.
The Faena Hotel Miami Beach opened last November and occupies the former Saxony Hotel, a mainstay in the 1950s and ’60s for Hollywood icons such as Frank Sinatra. The film director Baz Luhrmann, his wife, Catherine Martin, an Academy Award-winning costumer designer, and Mr. Faena conceived the Art Deco fantastical aesthetic. The property has all the frills of luxury, such as butler service for every guest and a spa. More distinctive are the 150-seat theater, home to a cabaret-style show on weekends, and a pristine 100,000-square-foot swath of beach.
The Faena district’s other components surround the hotel; Casa Claridge’s and the condo Faena House are open, while the others are still to debut.
Faena Bazaar, a retail complex designed by Rem Koolhaas, is scheduled to open this fall, the other two residential buildings will come next year; and Faena Forum (faena.com/faena-forum) is expected to open this fall. This circular-shaped 43,000-square-foot cultural center, also designed by Mr. Koolhaas, has exhibition halls and two event spaces and will host performances and art exhibitions from global names.
For some locals, all the Faena hype is justified. Lee Schrager, a longtime Miami resident and founder of the well-regarded South Beach Wine & Food Festival, says that he was skeptical when he heard about the project more than three years ago but is impressed as it’s come to life. “I thought the Faena district was a lot of talk, and even without it being fully done, it has turned Mid-Beach, a neighborhood no one really knew about, into the place to be,” he said.

