HOUSTON — For some of the thousands of American soccer fans who steadfastly chanted, “U-S-A! U-S-A!” down to the final, desultory minute of their team's sobering thrashing by Argentina on Tuesday night, it might be just fine if the United States never played the Argentines again. The loss seemed that bad.
Still, a few minutes after it ended, after his team had endured the 4-0 rout in a Copa América Centenario semifinal, Coach Jurgen Klinsmann spotted Sunil Gulati listening in at his news conference and expressed the exact opposite sentiment.
He asked Gulati, the president of the United States Soccer Federation, for more.
“I see Sunil sitting there,” Klinsmann said. “If ever we can get a friendly with Argentina, please do it. With Brazil, please do it. Even if we get lessons here and there, that's part of our process. You've got to take those teams on in order to learn.”
What Klinsmann, those American fans and millions more watching on television learned Tuesday night was that there remains a huge talent gap between Argentina and the United States.
Klinsmann called the defeat — a thumping so complete that his team did not record a shot — a lesson and a pill to be swallowed. But he said he still believed that the only way to bridge that divide was to play top teams more often. He called his players far too respectful of Argentina and charged that they did not truly believe they could compete with the team, which FIFA has ranked No. 1 in the world.
But perhaps his most stinging criticism was expressed with an air of disgust.
“We are too nice,” Klinsmann said with a sneer, “too nice in those moments.”
Klinsmann said he was desperate to see his players push back, get tough, step on toes, as he put it, and not back down in awe of Argentina's Lionel Messi, or anyone else.
Gulati was more matter-of-fact. “We were badly beaten,” he said, “by a very good team.”
The only remedy in the long term, Klinsmann said, was more tests. He said he was eager for the team to be invited back to the Copa even at the short-term cost of more results like Tuesday's.
“Yes, no doubt about it,” he said. “These are the tournaments that will move us forward. These are the competitions that you need to play in order to grow.”
Yet in the two most recent games pitting the top teams from North and Central America and the Caribbean (Mexico and the United States) against top teams from South America (Chile and Argentina), the combined score was 11-0. In each match, the North American team looked overmatched from the first whistle to the last.
Still, Klinsmann looked hard for positives. He said he had told the players they should feel proud of the overall achievement, of winning three games and reaching the semifinals, which had been Klinsmann's goal before the tournament.
“We are very grateful to this Copa América to be a part of it,” he said. “We made it to the final four. There will always be a step backwards and then two more forward.”
The only other time the United States reached the semifinal stage of the Copa América was in 1995. Otherwise, the Americans' biggest semifinal appearance before Tuesday might have been at the 1930 World Cup.
Tuesday offered a chance for the Americans to reach their first Copa final, but they failed badly.
Michael Bradley, the captain of the United States team, said after the match that he could barely see past the disappointment.
“Nobody has the sentiment that just because you get to the semifinal you are playing with house money,” he said. “It doesn't work like that. The idea was to take it another step further and get to a final. For that reason, there is big disappointment. Ultimately, as time goes on a little bit, I think we can take a lot of positives from the tournament.”

