Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. Here's an idea. Cook a couple of chickens today. It is hardly more work than cooking just one. You can eat the first for dinner tonight, and use the other later this week for sandwiches, for salads, for tacos.
You might roast the chickens, or plop them on beer cans on the grill. You could fry them, in pieces, all afternoon. You could boil them and use one for David Tanis's recipe for Chinese cold-boiled chicken, and the other to shred into enchiladas verdes, or use for Coronation chicken salad. One day cooking, and you'll have two dinners done.
Then tomorrow night you could follow those who eschew meat on Mondays and make braised tofu in caramel sauce.
On Tuesday night, devour that second chicken. If you have some extra time in the kitchen as a result (and you oughta), make Mark Bittman's recipe for strawberry fool for dessert.
Wednesday you can try David's new recipe for harira, a Moroccan soup with tomatoes, lentils and chickpeas that's often served during Ramadan.
Tacos on Thursday, perhaps? If you start Kim Severson's recipe for carnitas on Wednesday night while the soup burbles away, you'll need only crisp the pork and warm the tortillas when you get home from work on Thursday, and adorn the meat with chopped onion and cilantro to serve.
Then, on Friday, you can make a different kind of tortilla entirely: Melissa Clark's recipe for a Spanish potato tortilla with tomato-pepper salad. It makes for a marvelous end to a week.
Other ideas for what to cook this week can be found on Cooking. Save the ones you like to your recipe box and rate them when you're done cooking. (We recognize that you may find recipes elsewhere. Which is why we've made it possible to save them to your recipe box just as easily as you do those that come from The Times. Here's how to do that.) You can leave notes on recipes, for the benefit of yourself and others. And if you're like us, you can post pictures of what you cook on social media. We monitor the hashtag #NYTCooking on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest.
Problems? We're here to help: cookingcare@nytimes.com.
Now, do make sure to read The Times's obituary of Bill Cunningham, the legendary Times photographer who died yesterday at 87. We will miss him greatly. Check out the artist James Prosek's work for the new “Invisible Boundaries” exhibition at the Buffalo Bill Center for the West, in Cody, Wyo. And you know what? Take a listen to Billy Bragg singing “New England,” back in 1983. See you tomorrow.

