LAS VEGAS — For decades, the country’s top professional sports leagues were so fearful of game-fixing that they generally dismissed the idea of putting teams in Las Vegas, the country’s gambling mecca.
But the once unthinkable has quickly become a reality: Las Vegas has landed one big league team, and it may have two or even three in the future.
On Wednesday, the N.H.L. added Las Vegas to its 30-team league, its first expansion in 16 years. With the stigma fading, the N.F.L. could follow if the Raiders, who have been unable to persuade Oakland, Calif., to help them build a new home, can get officials here to help pay for a new domed stadium.
Major League Soccer has explored putting a team in Las Vegas. Even Major League Baseball, which remains scarred by gambling scandals, has softened its stance.
Although the N.B.A. has not talked about putting a team here, Commissioner Adam Silver has publicly advocated regulating professional sports betting.
Las Vegas, which was the largest American city without a big league team, tried for years to land one in the belief that it would unify the community and certify its status as a big city growing less reliant on gambling. Those calls fell on deaf ears until a few years ago, when leagues recognized that the spread of sports wagering into nearly every state — from casinos to lotteries to fantasy sports — made Las Vegas less of a threat to their games than they once imagined.
Indeed, according to the American Gaming Association, 19 N.F.L. stadiums are less than 20 miles from a casino, and daily fantasy companies allow fans to bet on a lineup of players of their design using a computer or smartphone.
Leagues still bar players from betting on games, and some prohibit them from working at or with casinos, presumably to keep them away from bettors trying to recruit them to throw games. But some of the biggest game-fixing scandals have occurred far from Las Vegas, and players are better paid now — so they are less prone to taking money from gamblers.
“I never believed there was a taboo about Las Vegas,” Mayor Carolyn G. Goodman said Tuesday. “Gambling is everywhere. Some people are provincial and don’t want to change the status quo. But you have to get with the times. Pro sports are a natural here.”
Continuing to shun Las Vegas also amounted to leaving money on the table. The Las Vegas area has 2.1 million residents, up from 1.4 million in 2000, according to the city’s Convention and Visitors Authority. The economy has diversified from its well-known casinos and entertainment as aviation and technology companies have moved here.
Even without putting teams here, the leagues have embraced Las Vegas, which has hosted an N.B.A. All-Star Game and an N.B.A. summer league. The N.H.L. has held its annual awards dinner here for several years. Teams also accept sponsorships from casinos, and Major League Baseball and the N.H.L. have invested in DraftKings, one of the largest daily fantasy operators.
“I think Las Vegas is one of the real crown jewels of communities in the United States,” the owner Jerry Jones of the Dallas Cowboys told reporters in May. “For me, I think that certainly the fact that Las Vegas has a gambling aspect to it is far overshadowed by the entertainment value, if you will, the family appeal that you have, the convention appeal.”
Skeptics remain. Although the N.F.L.’s commissioner, Roger Goodell, has said he is open to the possibility of a team moving to Las Vegas, he told ESPN in April that the league remained against anything that could sway games.
“To me, where I cross the line is anything that can impact the integrity of the game,” Goodell told ESPN. “If people feel like it’s going to have an influence on the outcome of the game, we are absolutely opposed to that.”
That includes having players in casinos. Last summer, Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo and other players were prevented from attending a fantasy football convention that was to be held at a casino in Las Vegas.
Some observers believe Las Vegas will have a hard time supporting a pro team because so many residents are from elsewhere and root for the teams they grew up with. Many also work in the tourism industry and are busy on game days.
“Because there’s so much new population, because it’s a 24-hour community, because it’s so suburbanized, there isn’t the same sense of community,” said Michael Green, who teaches classes on the history of the city and the state at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
In particular, selling hockey in the desert can be tough, something the owners of the troubled Coyotes learned in Arizona, where the debt-laden team was taken over by the N.H.L.
The N.H.L. has never voiced much concern about the gambling in Las Vegas because, as Commissioner Gary Bettman has said on a few occasions, the casinos’ take on hockey games is quite small.
“We don’t worry about the integrity of our game,” Bettman said Wednesday.
The much bigger issue for the N.H.L. has been the financial viability of a franchise in a nontraditional hockey market (meaning not very cold).
A host of minor league hockey teams, including the Gamblers, the Outlaws, the Aces, the Thunder and the Ice Dice, have struggled in Las Vegas.
The N.H.L. is hoping this time is different.
On Wednesday, the league’s 30 governors, or owners, unanimously approved a new team for Las Vegas that will be owned by Bill Foley, a financial services tycoon, who will pay a $500 million expansion fee. The team, which has not been named yet, will begin playing in the 2017-18 season in the new T-Mobile Arena, built by MGM Resorts International and the venue operator, AEG. About 14,000 fans have placed deposits on season tickets.
“We think this is a tremendously exciting opportunity not just for Las Vegas but for the league as well,” Bettman said, pointing to the city’s growing population and reputation for entertainment.
Bettman dismissed concerns that an N.H.L. team cannot succeed in a desert city. He noted that the league’s teams in California, Florida and Texas all made the playoffs this past season and that youth hockey participation had grown 37 percent in Nevada in the last decade.
The N.F.L. may be an easier sell. Football is far more popular, and the Raiders are a local favorite because of their outlaw image and because they play in neighboring California.
But in a chicken-or-egg scenario, the Raiders’ owner, Mark Davis, will not move the team unless he has a new stadium for it to play in, and Las Vegas and Clark County will not help him build that stadium unless he has a green light from the league to move.
Davis and the Las Vegas Sands are pushing a proposal to build a $1.4 billion domed stadium that includes $750 million in hotel taxes, but the Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee is pushing a more modest plan with a reduced public contribution. Some rival casino and hotel operators in Las Vegas do not want to give the Sands an edge.
By the end of July, the committee must send a final recommendation to the governor, who can call a special session of the state’s Legislature so that lawmakers can vote on whether to authorize Clark County to raise its hotel tax.
Like all debates over the use public funds for sports venues, the decision is fraught. Proponents say hotel taxes are primarily paid by the 42 million visitors to Las Vegas each year, not local residents, and the stadium will draw lots of out-of-town visitors.
“The amount of publicity it will give Las Vegas around the world will be immense, and the funding will not be on Las Vegas or the state of Nevada, so it’s a unique way to think of how to get this built,” said Tim Leiweke, a consultant hired by the Sands Corporation to help get the stadium built.
Opponents argue that money from the hotel room tax could be spent on other needs, like education and transportation, or to expand the convention center to attract more high-paying visitors. They also point to T-Mobile Arena, which was privately financed.
“Las Vegas is in a very unique position because it doesn’t need an N.F.L. team to make the stadium work,” said Ed Uehling, a longtime resident who has argued against using hotel taxes for team owners. “You can really build it, and they will come.”
But significant questions persist. The $1.4 billion price tag does not include buying the land or upgrading the surrounding infrastructure. There are also concerns about building a stadium at a preferred site near McCarran Airport because it could interfere with air traffic. Buying land at other sites could cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
“There’s a huge appetite for football, but a lot of questions about a stadium,” said Steve Sisolak, chairman of the board of Clark County commissioners. “You can’t confuse the two.”
Davis, who declined to be interviewed, has promised to contribute $500 million toward the cost of a stadium. But he has to deliver on his promise to move his team. Prominent N.F.L. owners like Jones and Robert K. Kraft of the New England Patriots have voiced support for a team in Las Vegas, but at least 24 owners would have to approve any relocation, and Davis would have to pay a sizable relocation fee.
To protect Las Vegas and surrounding Clark County, Steve Hill, who leads the Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee, said the public would not contribute to a new stadium unless the Raiders were allowed to move. He added that taxpayers would not be on the hook for any unexpected increases in the construction cost or in the cost of running the building and said he wanted the Raiders and Sands to split any profits with the public if the stadium generated returns above a certain threshold.
Even if the Raiders and Sands resist those demands, Hill said the possibility that an N.F.L. team will move to Nevada was as high as it had ever been, thanks to the melting concerns about the influence of gambling.
“It is somewhat destined that Las Vegas will have an N.F.L. team,” Hill said. “I don’t think I would have said that five or 10 years ago.”

