A day after the massacre in a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., thousands of gay and transgender men and women gathered outside the Stonewall Inn in Greenwich Village for a vigil where Mayor Bill de Blasio, among others, was to speak before the names of the dead were to be read.
It was an opportunity for the mayor to solidify his relationship with a constituency that should be an unassailable base of support for his administration. But as the speeches dragged on, some in the crowd chanted over the mayor and his wife, Chirlane McCray, demanding that the victims’ names be read. When the police commissioner, William J. Bratton, took the stage, some broke into loud boos and heckling.
The briefly rancorous scene, unusual for a somber event in the immediate aftermath of a terrorist attack, laid bare the rifts in New York City’s polyglot gay and transgender community, and underscored the degree to which it has yet to fully embrace Mr. de Blasio.
Some take issue with the mayor’s strong backing of Mr. Bratton, who despite his welcoming posture toward gay officers at Police Headquarters — a department video features officers proclaiming themselves “out and proud” — is still seen by some as the architect of punitive policies that disproportionately affect gay and transgender young people, particularly minorities.
Others, especially those who backed Christine C. Quinn in the 2013 Democratic mayoral primary, have not completely warmed to Mr. de Blasio. Ms. Quinn, then the City Council speaker, was seeking to become New York City’s first openly gay mayor; though exit polls indicated she lost to Mr. de Blasio even among gay voters, she attracted a bigger portion of votes there than among any other demographic.
“I’ll tell you some good things, but I want to make sure we don’t let him off the hook,” said Emmaia Gelman of Irish Queers, an advocacy group for gay and lesbian Irish-Americans. “I think rich queers are fine with de Blasio and feeling supported. And poor queers are really under the gun. Literally under the gun in some cases,” she added, referring to feelings of police harassment.
In many ways, the fragments of dissent mirror the disappointment among some of the mayor’s supporters who say that he has fallen short on his commitment to bring about radical change to the city’s police tactics, and to do more to protect and increase the levels of affordable housing.
But there is no question that the de Blasio administration has taken steps to make New York City, long a sanctuary for gay and transgender people from all over the country, an even more welcoming place, as it prepares for the gay pride parade on Sunday.
Subway riders stare up at city-sponsored ads featuring transgender men and women to remind them that New Yorkers can use whatever bathroom aligns with their gender identity. Public-school teachers are being trained to address gay and transgender questions and issues among students. For the first time, the Education Department has a gay and transgender liaison and, under pressure from Mr. de Blasio, gays have been allowed to march in the annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade in Manhattan.
The administration has expanded and altered city services to make them more accessible for gay and transgender New Yorkers, including at city-run hospitals and through the Human Rights Commission. In January, the city said it was adding 300 beds for homeless youths over three years and deploying additional staff members to coordinate services for youths entering shelters to address the needs of vulnerable gay and transgender young people in the city.
“One of the biggest successes is his goal to increase equality, to increase the voices heard at City Hall,” said Anthony Hayes, vice president for public affairs and policy at the nonprofit AIDS advocacy group G.M.H.C. “What it does is make sure that L.G.B.T. voices are represented. That the trans community knows that they’re valued.”
On a personal level, Mr. de Blasio has long evinced a comfort and fluency with gay issues that is rare in a straight politician, said advocates, supporters and gay elected leaders. His marriage in 1994 to Ms. McCray — who, before dating Mr. de Blasio, had long identified as a lesbian — was officiated by a pair of gay ministers.
The actress Cynthia Nixon, whose support for Mr. de Blasio dates back more than a decade, recalled a large fund-raiser with gay supporters of Mr. de Blasio in May 2013 when his standing in the polls was low. “There were many, many risqué things,” she said, including a drag queen telling raunchy jokes and a performer who gave Mr. de Blasio “a bit of a lap dance.”
Ms. Nixon, along with Emma Wolfe, now the mayor’s director of intergovernmental affairs, recalled how at ease Mr. de Blasio was, and how much he reveled in the moment, even if it made some in his campaign nervous. “As a political operative, it was my instinct to start walking to the stage,” said Ms. Wolfe, one of many gay top officials in the de Blasio administration.
Another fund-raiser for Mr. de Blasio, hosted by a gay councilman, Daniel Dromm, a Queens Democrat, was being held on Wednesday at an Indian restaurant in Jackson Heights.
Mr. Dromm, who helped found the Queens pride parade, pointed to the creation of municipal identification cards, which were aimed at undocumented immigrants, for their significant yet often overlooked benefit to transgender New Yorkers. Unlike state-issued identification, on the municipal card, gender can be listed in whatever way a person identifies.
“His heart is in the right place,” said Kate Barnhart, the director of New Alternatives, a drop-in center for homeless youths and young adults, including those forced from their homes by parents who disapprove of their being gay or transgender. “But in terms of effective policies, there’s still much left to be desired.” In particular, she said, many homeless youths who have been given vouchers by the city find they cannot use them and remain on the street.
Councilman Corey Johnson, a Manhattan Democrat who is gay, acknowledged that “even here in New York, we still have many things to accomplish.” But he was quick to add that Mr. de Blasio had strongly supported City Council legislation on gay and transgender issues.
The aftermath of the June 12 massacre in Orlando has been another moment for the city to convey its condolences and support.
Rainbow bunting has hung over the steps of City Hall for more than a week, first in recognition of the victims as nearby flags flew at half-staff, then, as the flags returned to their full height, in solidarity as the city prepares for the annual pride march in Manhattan.
“We expect this to be the greatest outpouring of support for the L.G.B.T. community this city has ever seen,” Mr. de Blasio said of the march as he addressed an association of gay officers at Police Headquarters last week. “We believe in an inclusive society and we will ensure that that society is protected.”
But the killings in Orlando exposed the distrust that still exists between the police and members of the gay community, a distrust that stretches back to the original Stonewall protests and before.
The de Blasio administration is aware of the tension. “With any movement there should be activists pushing the envelope,” Ms. Wolfe said. The mayor, she said, “deeply, deeply appreciates the intense history, and that he must do everything he can to improve police-community relations.”
Elvin Garcia, the City Hall liaison for gay issues, said that “no one is waving a victory flag” and stressed that more work is yet to come, particularly in making the city feel safer for gay and transgender young people.
In recognition of the tense relations, a public safety forum with gay community members and some of the Police Department’s counterterrorism officers before the parade Sunday will be held not at Police Headquarters or City Hall, Mr. Garcia said, but at “a space that’s safe and welcoming,” possibly at the L.G.B.T. Community Center in Greenwich Village.
Many activists said they had moved on to the more nettlesome problems of housing, policing and poverty that reach well beyond traditional gay issues. “Ending violence doesn’t just mean putting a rainbow in front of your bar,” said Alok Vaid-Menon of the Audre Lorde Project, a nonprofit dedicated to minority gay and transgender New Yorkers. “It means changing housing policy.”

