A dear friend has fallen on hard times financially, which has exacerbated some mental health issues. (These have strained our relationship in the past.) She confided in me that she would like to visit a therapist but can’t afford to. I would like to help her with this cost. How do I offer the money without offending her? She is proud. And how do I assure myself that the money is being used for therapy only? I would hate to be taken advantage of, which has also been a problem for us.
ANONYMOUS
Although we are strangers, let me spritz my shortcomings all over you like cheap perfume. One of my lesser qualities, as a friend, is that as soon as mine so much as breathe a problem, I move into “solve it” mode — when, often, they simply want to vent and be heard. In my zeal, I can rob them of the chance to work through issues on their terms, and I occasionally act like a bulldozer. This may not apply to you (or it may). I’m just throwing it out there.
Assuming you gave your friend the chance to talk out her dilemma, express your generous offer as kindly as you have here. Say: “Dawn, I’ve been doing well at work and have some extra cash. I would really like to help you pay for the therapy you mentioned. Will you think about accepting a gift?” (Do not make this a loan. That would be a recipe for disaster.) Then don’t mention the subject again until she comes back to you.
If she refuses, accept her decision. But if she agrees, discuss the terms of the arrangement: Will your contribution be a lump sum or a monthly stipend, and how long will it continue? Feel free to add, “This money will only be used for therapy, agreed?” But do not use this offer as an opportunity to rehash your past difficulties. If you don’t trust her enough to take her word about the expenditure, better not to make the offer. But I hope you do. It’s a touching show of friendship.
At our local elementary school, some parents light up cigarettes while waiting on the sidewalk outside the gates during pickup time. This is not illegal, but it bothers me that they care so little for the health of the children and others. I would like to address the issue but want to avoid a scene. Any suggestions?
STACEY
Do you think this is what Bob Dylan had in mind with his transposed nursery rhyme of a lyric: “He just smoked my eyelids and punched my cigarette”? I agree, Stacey: no scenes. And why tangle with smokers one at a time? Report the problem to the principal, who can post a sign or send an email to all parents, asking them to restrict their smoking to the inside of closed cars with their children onboard — the way my parents did. (Kidding! Smoking is bad.)
My mother-in-law has a milestone birthday next year and has mentioned repeatedly that she wants her two children to take her and our families on a big trip to celebrate. My parents and father-in-law have already marked this milestone with home-cooked meals and restaurant dinners. I find it presumptuous of her to expect a lavish celebration and unfair to our other parents. I don’t want to be rude, but I would not feel comfortable going on this vacation. May I explain why the next time she brings it up?
ANONYMOUS
I wouldn’t. Just because the other parents didn’t request destination birthdays is no immediate disqualification of hers. It’s not as if she’s asking for a chinchilla chubby (or some gift that she alone would enjoy). She’s looking for quality time and an adventure with her children and their families.
Why not discuss this with your husband? She’s his mother. Mine, for instance, sacrificed a great deal for us as children; it felt like a privilege to return the favor when we could afford to as adults. As for your parents being short-shrifted, plan a trip with them later on. (And perhaps clue them in that the squeaky wheel gets the grease.)
I have a longtime friend who is single; she hangs around with two gay men. She often invites them to get-togethers I’ve initiated, where I think I’m going to see her alone and catch up on her news. This was particularly annoying when I offered her a free ticket to a dance performance that my husband and I underwrote. She asked for tickets for her friends, too. Any suggestions?
M., NEW YORK
News flash, M.: There is not much catching-up time during a dance performance (unless you are a really annoying audience member). There will be you, sitting with your husband, and your friend, sitting alone. If you want to hear about her life, invite her to lunch or coffee when you are both on your own. Ask, “Can we get together, one on one, to catch up?” If she brings her pals along, feel free to be annoyed — and stop inviting her.

