Aska Fredrik Berselius's decision to use the name of his last restaurant for his next one came late in the game. And it was one of the few easy parts of building and opening the new place. The tall, lanky Swedish chef, who closed his much-lauded new-Nordic restaurant two years ago, went through months of searching for space, then ran into complications with construction. Now, almost a year late, the square black room, one corner of which is taken up with an open kitchen, is ready. “I did not want one of those long, narrow dining rooms,” Mr. Berselius said. The restaurant has a spacious garden and a downstairs white-brick bar and lounge. (The dining room has no bar, like a growing number of restaurants.) For his 12- to 15-course tasting menus, which change daily, he is considering dishes like hake smoked in hay, and dry-aged beef with cured beef fat and salted gooseberries. Mr. Berselius is planning to find as many ingredients as possible in the Northeast; caviar from Finland will be one of his few imports. (Opens Tuesday): 47 South Fifth Street (Wythe Avenue), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 929-337-6792, askanyc.com.
Fumo White and gold lend elegance to this Italian restaurant in the heart of Harlem designed by Karen Gallo. The menu by the chef and an owner, Steven Gallo, is mostly traditional Italian-American and includes chicken Parmesan, penne with vodka sauce and Neapolitan-style pizza from a wood-burning oven: 1600 Amsterdam Avenue (139th Street), 646-692-6675, fumorestaurant.com.
Latin Beet Kitchen Until dinnertime, the Peruvian restaurant Raymi largely sits idle. Rather than letting the space go to waste, the partners have opened a fast-casual spot in the front serving South American-accented bowls with choices of ingredients and topping. Despite the name, there is no connection with Franklin Becker's Little Beet chain. (Opens Tuesday): 43 West 24th Street, 212-929-1200 latinbeet.com.
Osaka Grub Okonomiyaki rice pancakes are the latest category of Japanese food to gain traction in New York. At this newcomer to the Essex Street Market, they are sold with meat or vegetarian toppings, sandwiching a meat filling for sliders. Fried chicken is also served: 120 Essex Street (Delancey Street), osakagrub.com.
Meat Hook Sandwich Shop This lunch-only subsidiary of the Meat Hook will close July 10. Some of the sandwiches will be served at the Meat Hook butcher shop that moved to Graham Avenue this year. The Sandwich Shop outpost at the Berg'n food hall in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, will also close: 495 Lorimer Street (Grand Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 719-302-4665, meathooksandwich.com.
Yunnan BBQ This Lower East Side Chinese restaurant will end its run after dinner service on Thursday.
Gabriel Israel, a native of Tel Aviv, is now the executive chef at Green Fig and Social Drink & Food, both in the Yotel on West 42nd Street. The chef, who was at Boulud Sud, created riffs on the Israeli dish shakshuka with his Shuka Truck, now out of business. His food combines Israeli, North African and Mediterranean influences.
Eckart Witzigmann, a German chef with three Michelin stars, was the mentor of Markus Glocker, the chef at Bâtard restaurant in TriBeCa. Mr. Glocker is preparing a $75 prix fixe menu in honor of the chef's 75th birthday, Wednesday to Saturday and July 5 to 7: Bâtard, 239 West Broadway (White Street), 212-219-2777, batardtribeca.com.
Bourdain Market Anthony Bourdain has pushed back the opening of his ambitious international food market on Pier 57 on the Hudson River to 2019 from the previous target date of late 2017. “Everything is taking long,” Mr. Bourdain wrote in an email. He said the original schedule had been overly optimistic.
Megu The area just north of the meatpacking district has become a magnet for Asian behemoths like Tao and Buddakan, and now Megu. This Japanese-fusion restaurant, which disappeared from New York two years ago, is coming back now that Jon Bakhshi of Beautique has taken over the global chain. It will open in a few weeks in the space that was Cherry: Dream Downtown Hotel, 355 West 16th Street.
Joël Robuchon, the esteemed French chef, is back on track to open a restaurant in Manhattan. L'Atelier de Joël Robuchon, his counter restaurant in the Four Seasons hotel, closed four years ago. Mr. Robuchon planned to reopen it, along with a patisserie, in Battery Park City, but that fell through. Now he has signed a lease for two floors in a condominium tower under construction at 100 East 53rd Street. He plans a fine-dining restaurant similar to the ones he has in Las Vegas, Tokyo, Macao and Singapore. The building is owned by the developer Aby Rosen and his partners, and is being designed by Norman Foster's London-based company, Foster & Partners. The restaurant, to be designed by Joseph Dirand, a French architect and designer, will occupy the second floor of the 15,000-square-foot space, which will have a Lexington Avenue entrance. On the ground floor will be a French market curated by Mr. Robuchon, and a pastry shop.

