“The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T” (1953) was, and is, one of a kind — and the only feature-length live-action movie to have been conceived, written and designed by the illustrator Theodor Geisel (1904-1991), otherwise known as Dr. Seuss.
The film's producer, Stanley Kramer, that most earnest of Hollywood liberals, never oversaw anything comparable to this extravagant Technicolor vision of a tyrannical piano teacher's quest for world domination. Nor was any other anti-fascist musical children's film expected to precipitate a merchandising bonanza. (It never happened.)
A nightmare dreamed by a 10-year-old boy, Bart (Tommy Rettig, later of the TV show “Lassie”), “The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T,” now out on Blu-ray from Mill Creek, was both a film of its political moment and a pro-kid, anti-adult statement for the ages. It would make a perfect double bill with “Invaders From Mars,” William Cameron Menzies' similarly hyperdesigned exercise in candy-colored Expressionism and paranoid fantasy, which had materialized several months earlier.
In both, parents are subject to external mind control, although, in “The 5,000 Fingers,” Bart's widowed mother (the singer and TV personality Mary Healy) isn't brainwashed by Martians but indoctrinated by the mad Dr. Terwilliker (Hans Conried, who was the voice of Captain Hook in Walt Disney's 1953 animated “Peter Pan”).
Dr. T is a musical führer who practices mass hypnosis and employs slave labor; his Terwilliker Institute is surrounded by electrified barbed wire. The fulfillment of his master plan entails 500 boys (with 5,000 “happy fingers”), all wearing beanies topped with flaccid hands, together playing a monstrous piano more suggestive of a factory assembly line than a baby grand.
The compositions at times parody Leni Riefenstahl's “Triumph of the Will,” while Dr. T, foppish and lanky, seems modeled after the wartime caricatures of Adolf Hitler that Mr. Geisel published in the New York tabloid PM. Adding to the allegory, the adult hero, an all-American plumber named Zabladowski (Peter Lind Hayes, Ms. Healy's real-life husband and show-business partner), must be coaxed to join Bart in the struggle against the music teacher's totalitarian racket. Zabladowski's hocus-pocus tango with Dr. T, one of many splendidly strange musical numbers, anticipates the spell-casting duels of the comic book Dr. Strange.
Given the movie's eccentric nature, production values are surprisingly high. The direction, by the versatile if impersonal Roy Rowland, is straightforward. (Or not: By some accounts, Mr. Rowland fell ill, and Mr. Kramer directed much of picture uncredited.) Mr. Geisel contributed some classic Seussian patter to the German theater composer Frederick Hollander's music. The dances, by Eugene Loring, who choreographed Aaron Copland's “Billy the Kid,” are funny, fluid and intentionally far-fetched. One remarkably long number, set in Dr. T's dungeon, has the prisoners rhythmically slugging one another and making music on what could be weapons or even stylized instruments of torture.
Although it has since become a cult film, “The 5,000 Fingers” was a resounding flop, as both a movie and marketing event. The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther found it “strange and confused” — hardly an inappropriate response to a kiddie show that ends with a red radioactive mushroom cloud followed by the elevation of the piano exercise “Chopsticks” to a discordant anthem of juvenile liberation.
That the stupendously intricate stop-motion animation “Anomalisa” is meant to be unique is signaled by its title, a play on the word “anomaly” and the name of its female protagonist, Lisa (voiced by Jennifer Jason Leigh).
“Anomalisa,” written by Charlie Kaufman (who directed with Duke Johnson), provides a profoundly unsettling experience. As purposefully inert as it is painstakingly animated, the movie simultaneously suggests a vast collective enterprise and a sense of anguished solitude. The tone is not quite comic and not exactly tragic. In her review, Manohla Dargis of The Times called it “a horror movie about the agonizing, banal surrealism of everyday life.”
A successful author of self-help books, Michael (David Thewlis), flies from Los Angeles to Cincinnati to give a motivational speech — an interesting gig for a depressed middle-aged guy. Staying at a business hotel, he contacts an old lover for a brief, disastrous encounter and stumbles into a one-night stand with Lisa, an awkward, self-deprecating young woman who is in town for his appearance and also a guest at the hotel. Michael and Lisa are individuated puppets. Everyone else — including the characters from the 1936 screwball comedy “My Man Godfrey,” seen briefly on Michael's hotel room TV — has more or less the same face and speaks with the voice of Tom Noonan.
“Anomalisa” continually calls attention to its paradoxical nature. “What is it to be human?” Michael wonders during a public presentation that is a baby step from a complete nervous breakdown. “What is it to be alive?” Several times, the film evokes Japanese bunraku puppet theater while subtly emphasizing the expressive power of the human voice. (It has its origins as a sort of live radio play written for Mr. Kaufman's Theater of the Ear.) The impersonal settings — airports, hotel rooms, cocktail lounges — are so lovingly miniaturized as to be a form of Pop Art. For all its artifice, “Anomalisa” features one of the most tender and weirdly authentic portrayals of sexual intimacy in the history of Hollywood movies.
Paramount's dual Blu-ray/DVD release includes three Blu-ray documentaries on the making of the film; one is wholly devoted to the sex scene, which not only gives the movie its heart and soul but also new meaning to the biblical phrase “labor of love.”
NEWLY RELEASED
BUSTER KEATON: THE SHORTS COLLECTION 1917-1923 All of Mr. Keaton's surviving silent shorts are restored and reissued in a new five-disc edition. Thirteen are apprentice works made with Fatty Arbuckle; 19 are directed by the master. It's essential cinema by any standard, still fresh and endlessly rewarding. Available on Blu-ray and DVD. (Kino Classics)
A CHILD IS WAITING Stanley Kramer hired John Cassavetes to direct a drama exposing the condition of children institutionalized for mental disabilities. Reissued on Blu-ray, the 1963 movie has a strong documentary subtext, with Burt Lancaster and Judy Garland appearing along with child patients from the Pacific State Hospital in Pomona, Calif. (Kino Lorber)
FANTASTIC PLANET The Surrealist polymath Roland Topor provided the production design for René Laloux's 1973 cutout animation, an allegory about a slave revolt on the planet Ygam. Reviewing the movie in The New York Times, Howard Thompson characterized it as a “sci-fi honey, with tiny earthlings ‘from a destroyed planet' dominated as pets or outcasts by huge, robotlike rulers.” On Blu-ray and DVD. (Criterion)
THE LIFE OF VERDI Burt Lancaster provided English narration when this lavish Italian mini-series was televised, dubbed, on PBS in 1983. Writing in The Times, John O'Connor called it “sumptuous” and “splendid,” noting that the overall high quality of the production “more than makes up for its occasional failings.” Available on DVD or Acorn TV. (RLJ Entertainment)
ZOOTOPIA Bunnies, foxes and other furry creatures establish and police an urban civilization in this enormously successful 3-D digital animation. In his review for The Times in March, Neil Genzlinger observed that the film is “filled with enough savvy jokes that adults should consider slipping into the theater even if they don't have an accompanying child.” Available in either 3-D or 2-D dual Blu-ray/DVD editions. (Disney)

