Populism got its formal name in this country in the 1890s, when struggling farmers and other laborers formed the People's Party. For decades, histories — like John Hicks's “The Populist Revolt” (1931) — told the story as a straightforward case of the working class seeking economic justice.
But in 1955, Richard Hofstadter published “The Age of Reform,” which “examines, criticizes and replaces some of the most popular stereotypes of recent American history,” as D.W. Brogan wrote in the Book Review. One of those stereotypes, according to Hofstadter, was the motive of the original populist movement. Farmers, he argued, were not just hurting economically but were having trouble adapting to a changing world, and lashed out at their change in status as much as at unfairness. Brogan said that Hofstadter “acutely suggests” that “­McCarthyism has deep rural roots.”
In “Democratic Promise” (1977), Lawrence Goodwyn made a case for the noble side of populism, but also acknowledged its missteps. Alden Whitman wrote in The Times: “Although many populists understood that black farmers ‘are in the ditch just like we are,' populism as a whole could not escape the prevailing white supremacy value system of its era.”
In writing about Michael Kazin's “The Populist Persuasion” for the Book Review in 1995, David Oshinsky noted that populism moved “sharply to the right” after World War II. “In this new age of mass advertising and material abundance,” Oshinsky wrote, “most workers came to view themselves as consumers and taxpayers, not as members of an exploited class, and seemed less concerned by the power of big business, which provided them with good jobs, than by the growth of big government.” Oshinsky's conclusion still echoes: “For those in power today, the message should be clear: Populism is a deep, enduring impulse with a very fickle past.”
Quotable
“It was called ‘Just Me and My Dog.' It was this thinly veiled critique of my parents for not letting me get a dog.” — Yaa Gyasi, author of “Homegoing,” on the first story she wrote, when she was 7, in an interview with Powell's Books
Among the French
The actress Olivia de Havilland is approaching her 100th birthday and to celebrate, the publisher Crown Archetype has reissued her 1962 memoir, “Every Frenchman Has One.” De Havilland has lived in Paris since the 1950s, and in this brief and breezy book she writes things like: “Of course the thing that staggers you when you first come to France is the fact that all the French speak French — even the children.” In a new interview in the book, de Havilland cites the lessons she's learned from Parisian women: “The importance of tact, restraint, subtlety, and the avoidance of banality,” and the tenets of what she calls the “Paris principle”: “1. Discretion 2. Discretion 3. Discretion.”

