Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. Summer Fridays aren't really a thing in the newspaper world. Maybe they're not a part of your work experience either. But if you can take a slide at the end of this week, or maybe better yet can clear a little time on Saturday, set yourself up to make Melissa Clark's new recipe for a buckwheat berry cake, which she's prettily designed to celebrate our nation's independence. It'd be pretty great to bring to a cookout over the weekend, before the fireworks.
As for tonight? Traditionally we cook without proper recipes on Wednesdays at Cooking, improvising off written cues. The dream is Pascal Wintz. (The reality is often a little closer to Ryan Stiles and Colin Mochrie.)
So how about we riff off the cooking of the Los Angeles chef Suzanne Goin, and slowly pan-roast some chicken thighs in olive oil and butter scented with lots of fresh thyme leaves and a couple of crumbled chiles de árbol? If it's not too hot in the kitchen, heat the broiler at the end, and crisp the finished chicken beneath a thin smear of mustard and a shower of buttered bread crumbs. Serve alongside or on top of a pile of baby greens lightly dressed in lemon juice and olive oil, with some bread to mop up the juices. That's fine.
If you want an actual recipe, we have plenty of those as well. Have you tried Florence Fabricant's recipe for Korean spaghetti and meatballs yet? Or mine for soy-sauce-pickled eggs on rice? Kim Severson's recipe for Southern-style shrimp scampi? Julia Moskin's recipe for lemon-garlic-kale salad? Or Pierre Franey's recipe for linguine with lemon sauce?
Save the ones that interest you to your recipe box so you can cook them later. And please, when you've finished cooking, let us know how everything turned out. You can rate the recipes on a scale of one to five stars. You can leave notes on them as well. And you can – and please do! – share them with friends via email and social media.
We'll be standing by if you run into problems: cookingcare@nytimes.com.
Finally, some programming notes. It's pretty cool that Broadway's “She Loves Me” will be livestreamed on Thursday night for $9.99. We're really into this “Chef's Table” episode about the New Zealand chef Ben Shewry. (Here's an article I wrote about one of his line cooks at Attica in Melbourne, Australia.) Did you read Stephanie Strom in The Times on Perdue trying to make life better for its chickens? Do so. And, hey, it's summer. Time to get the new Alan Furst novel and read it in the gloaming, in bare feet. See you soon!

