PARIS — On a Tuesday night, as on many other occasions, the Philharmonie de Paris, a concert hall that seats 2,400, resonated with long, flowing melodies and intricate musical compositions of unbuttoned exuberance.
This time, however, an ecstatic audience cheered and burst into applause, and even booed, in tune not only with the players onstage, but also with the 22 other ones who ran up and down the field on a giant screen set up behind them. Every tackle and pass intertwined with serene pizzicati, rhythmic spiccato and even the droning noise of electric guitars.
In the performance — a joint initiative of Tatane, a sports collective, and the Philharmonie de Paris — students from the Regional Conservatoire of Paris provided the audience with an eclectic musical backdrop to Croatia’s victory against Spain in the European Championships group stage.
The Philharmonie de Paris, on the northeastern edge of the city, has hosted many concerts of the talented young musicians since it was inaugurated by François Hollande in January of last year.
The Fête de la Musique, an annual music celebration held on June 21 in France since 1981, made the perfect occasion to enchant ears with Dvorak as the ball on the field was being lightly exchanged between players. The music abruptly changed to the easily recognizable beat of “Eye of the Tiger” when things on the field started to heat up.
The audience heard the names of Mendelssohn and Brahms, but also those of Morata, Kalinic and Perisic, the players who scored in the match. The warm notes of the Spanish composer Albéniz accompanied La Roja’s players as they took over the Croatian half.
People who attended the concert-game had not been exactly sure what to expect before the show.
“I think it’s weird, it doesn’t mingle well,” said Léa Sánchez, a 20-year-old French-Spanish woman who wore a Spain jersey and attended with her sister and grandmother, Alissia Gonzáles, who was coming to the Philharmonie de Paris for the first time.
While the city handed out 2,000 free invitations to attract an audience that was not familiar with classical concerts, most of the attendees consisted of smart-looking Parisians, some of whom sipped white wine at the bar before kickoff.
The wrapped-in-flags kind of supporters that public viewings of games at the Euros regularly attract were not exactly present. But the Philharmonie de Paris, with its futuristic waves of steel and concrete, can be intimidating.
“I had a hard time finding people who like both music and soccer,” said Pastor Peppe, a 48-year-old Spaniard living in France.
“I was expecting more flags,” he added.
The venue on Tuesday was something like a gigantic movie theater, a stadium and a concert hall, with hundreds of people who sat on the floor and others in the seats above them.
Some seized the opportunity to enjoy a festive moment without the hurdles of actually having attended the game.
“I would not take my children into a stadium,” said Vianney Foucault, a 33-year-old computer engineer and father of two. Foucault said he was tear-gassed at the French Cup final between Paris St.-Germain and Marseille at Stade de France a few weeks ago.
After intermission — halftime in the match in Bordeaux — the orchestra of more than 40 musicians spanned a wide register and carried listeners through the Colombian pop singer Shakira, the French composer Georges Delerue’s drawling melodies, Bernard Herrmann’s nerve-racking compositions and even Eminem’s “8 Mile.”
The game ended with a standing audience that cheered and sang along to Queen’s “We Are the Champions” as the Croatian players, who had surprised Spain, 2-1, took each other in their arms onscreen.

