Hi Eric, Nikole and Will,
President Obama's attempt at immigration reform was the big loser at the Supreme Court Thursday, and affirmative action in university admissions was the winner. Let's start with immigration: In this odd term of only eight justices, the court has weighed in on United States v. Texas with a 4-4 split and an unsatisfying one-line affirmance of the lower court to deny deportation relief to as many as five million immigrants who could have applied for it.
A lot of analysts, including Eric, thought this case should have easily gone the Obama administration's way, as a traditional display of prosecutorial discretion and executive power (in an area — immigration law — in which the federal government holds particular sway). But now immigrants have lost the crucial gain they won from a president who started out by cracking down on them at the border and in their communities. I'm not sure how that plays out in the November election — do voters who pushed for reform blame the Democrats for failing to make good on their promise, or the Republicans for refusing to join the president? Maybe Donald Trump's candidacy and his promised border wall cancel out the question. To state the obvious, if nothing else the court has issued a potent reminder that the identity of the ninth justice matters.
A question for you: Is there any way that Obama could try to implement his program for deportation relief in at least some parts of the country, despite Thursday's ruling? With an eight-justice court, we may have to get used to this sort of question: When the Supreme Court divides evenly and simply affirms the lower-court ruling (which went against the administration in the immigration case), its opinions generally don't make national law, or carry value as legal precedent, the way a majority opinion does. So why, exactly, are the administration's hands are tied throughout the country by a ruling of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which only has authority over Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi?
Emily
Hi Nikole, Emily and Eric,
What a day.
Emily, you asked about the administration's options after Thursday's 4-4 split in the immigration lawsuit. As you say, when the Supreme Court divides evenly, it doesn't issue an opinion and simply affirms the lower court's judgment. Normally, this would leave the administration free to keep pressing the issue in other circuits.
But there's a special wrinkle in this case, and it's a little bit technical. (Bear with me.) The district court issued an injunction with nationwide scope. The government challenged that nationwide injunction before the Fifth Circuit, but it lost. “The Constitution vests the district court with ‘the judicial power of the United States,' ” the Fifth Circuit said, and “that power is not limited to the district wherein the court sits but extends across the country.” When the Supreme Court affirmed the lower court's judgment on Thursday, it affirmed that nationwide injunction.
That means the administration is basically stuck for now. It could try to find ways to litigate the issue in other circuits or argue that the injunction is void even though the Supreme Court affirmed it on Thursday. But ultimately, if it disobeys the injunction, it risks being held in contempt back in Texas, and Judge Andrew Hanen has already demonstrated that he's willing to be aggressive if he senses defiance by government lawyers.
Instead, as you say, the case is likely to proceed to final judgment in the district court. But that is probably just a formality. I doubt the administration has much chance of prevailing in the lower courts at this point, given what those courts have already decided. The administration's only real hope is to wait until a ninth justice is commissioned and try again — either by appealing the final judgment or filing a petition for rehearing. But that might be a long wait.
There's more to talk about, and more to come, but let me just note the other 4-4 ruling Thursday that hasn't gotten much attention: Dollar General v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. This case was the longest outstanding opinion at the court (it was argued more than six months ago), and it had the potential to impose major limits on tribal sovereignty. So this 4-4 ruling is a big reprieve for the tribes.
Looking forward to reading everybody else's thoughts on Fisher.
Will
Hi Will, Nikole and Eric,
Turning to the other case, Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, Justice Anthony Kennedy finally found an affirmative action plan to like, or at least uphold. The university allots 75 percent of the space in the freshman class to students who graduate near the top of their high-school classes, in what's called the “top-10-percent plan.” The rest of the spots are awarded on the basis of what U.T. calls “holistic” admissions, which are based grades and test scores, and also personal factors, including essays, work experience, socioeconomic status, family composition and race. In the court's first crack at this case in 2013, Kennedy joined the conservative wing and sounded almost entirely disapproving of U.T.'s consideration of race, among the other elements, for one-quarter of admissions. When the court agreed to review this case again, I thought affirmative action at U.T., and perhaps across the country, was doomed. Instead, on Thursday the court ruled 4-3 that U.T.'s admissions program is constitutional. (Justice Elena Kagan didn't participate in the case.) Somewhere along the way, Kennedy got off the bus.
At least, that's what it looks like to me. What do you think — did Kennedy lose his enthusiasm for killing affirmative action? Or did the questionable claim of the plaintiff, Abigail Fisher, that being white cost her a spot at U.T., which Nikole helped expose, finally give him pause? I don't agree with much of Justice Samuel Alito's dissent, but I do think he's right that it's hard to square Kennedy's skepticism three years ago with his acceptance of U.T.'s rationale now.
I don't hold that against affirmative action. I hold it against the court's skimpy and inadequate rationale for affirmative action in the first place. The court's previous decisions allow universities to take race into account for admissions only for the sake of “educational diversity,” leaving no room for remedying the present-day consequences of the racism that's threaded through the country's history. When Kennedy loses debating points to Alito now, it's because he's staying in the small box that the court drew. The best reasons for allowing affirmative action lie outside it.
The court's past decisions also told universities that they may not fill seats using racial quotas, yet they approved the argument that the benefits of diversity come from enrolling a “critical mass” of underrepresented minority students. In other words, don't count, but come up with some goal for achieving diversity that is “sufficiently measurable,” as Kennedy put it this time. I don't know what that means, practically speaking. Kennedy is willing to settle for vagueness and to defer to U.T.'s stated goals: promoting cross-racial understanding, preparing students for an increasingly diverse society and work force, and cultivating leaders. All worthy. None particularly measurable.
Justice Alito, who called the decision “affirmative action gone berserk” from the bench Thursday, had a field day with the majority's apparent contradictions. He accused them of violating “decades of precedent rejecting blind deference to government officials defending ‘inherently suspect' classifications.” Maybe. But how much should the court poke its nose into the government's justifications for affirmative action in the first place? I know, we're in the land of strict scrutiny, in which the court is supposed to look closely at any government program that treats people differently according to their race. But why should judges stop Texas officials from trying to address the underrepresentation of minority applicants to public universities, in a state that's majority white?
One thing that leaps out at me about U.T.'s affirmative-action program is how limited the benefit to African-American and Hispanic students actually is. “The proportion of U.T. freshmen who are Hispanic is 26 percentage points lower than the number of Hispanics in that age group across the state,” according to The Texas Tribune. “The enrollment gap for black students is seven percentage points.” White students, by contrast, are overrepresented by 11 percentage points by the paper's measure.
Two writers from The Tribune and the podcast Reveal, Neena Satija and Matthew Watkins, also found that the top-10-percent plan, which relies on the racial segregation of the state's high schools to achieve some diversity, doesn't benefit top students from poor schools, some of whom are black and Hispanic, to the degree one might think. Those high-achieving students would get into U.T. automatically. Yet many don't even apply. “It's people who have money, people who are, like, prodigies and stuff, [who] end up there,” one Hispanic student who was ranked eighth in her class, but decided to go to a woman's college with a lower graduation rate for Hispanic students and fewer resources than U.T.-Austin, tells Satija and Watkins. The barriers to elite university are high and wide. Maybe it's time to move past the affirmative action battle and figure out how to more fully address the inequities — in K-through-12 education, among other things — that diminish the number of high-achieving low-income students who go to selective colleges nationally.
Emily
Hi Will, Emily and Nikole,
Alito eviscerates Kennedy's arguments, but this has less to do with the merits of affirmative action than with the legal box — as Emily puts it — that the court has constructed for itself. In the earlier round of this case, decided in 2013, the court held that a race-based affirmative-action program must pass the fearsome “strict scrutiny” standard that applies to all other laws that make citizens' rights and obligations turn on their race.
“Strict scrutiny” almost always means “the government loses”; it's a legacy of the court's battle against Jim Crow laws in the 1950s and 1960s. In those days, racial classifications almost always hurt African-Americans. Affirmative action is supposed to help them. Nonetheless, the court rejected the argument that some other lower standard of scrutiny should apply to affirmative-action programs that benefit minorities. While it had made the same point in earlier decisions, the latest iteration in 2013 was the strongest yet.
Under the strict-scrutiny standard, the government must identify a valid “interest” that the law or (in this case) admissions policy furthers. The earlier case law indicated that diversity was a permissible government interest while holding that other possible rationales for affirmative action — trying to counter continuing discrimination, for example — were not. Universities support affirmative action for three reasons: Students want it, faculty members want it and many important alumni and donors want it. The reasons these constituents support affirmative action don't really matter, as far as academic administrators are concerned. And their reasons are surely more complex than “diversity,” whatever that means.
But because of the court's earlier decisions, everything has to be stuffed into the “diversity” box. So universities say they want to advance diversity but never explain what they mean (nor did the court, in its earlier decisions and in its decision Thursday). This is fodder for the critics like Alito. So you like diversity — then why not work to enroll harder-to-attract Filipino-Americans or Cambodian-Americans rather than lump them together with “overrepresented” Asian-Americans? he asks. Would the U.T. class be sufficiently diverse if only poor African-Americans were admitted, or must middle-class and wealthy African-Americans, professionals and laborers, city-dwellers and country folk, musicians and athletes, be admitted as well?
There are deeper problems. Suppose we assume, as the court claims, that one of the legitimate benefits of diversity is that it promotes “cross-racial understanding.” There is little in Kennedy's opinion — zero, actually — about whether U.T.'s affirmative-action program has increased cross-racial understanding above whatever it would be if U.T. used race-neutral admissions. Matters get even more perplexing when we reach the issue of classroom diversity. U.T. seems to argue — though it's not entirely clear — that it needs to ensure racial balance within classes. It is of course possible that white students who think that black students must be bad at math will not be disabused of this stereotype if few black students take math classes. But it's also possible that the white students who make it into U.T. don't think this, or if they do, that their view will not change if they think the black students benefit from affirmative action. And just how many black students need to be in each class, and what do we do if they just don't want to take math in large numbers?
I mention all this not because I think affirmative action is a bad idea. I'm not sure whether it is or isn't, but I do think universities should be allowed to experiment with affirmative action. It's plausible enough as a policy, and if universities are not allowed to experiment, how are we ever going to learn which admissions policies work and which ones fail?
But it's precisely this type of argument that is (normally) foreclosed by the strict-scrutiny standard, which requires evidence rather than speculation. I read this case as holding that if a university doesn't use explicit race-based quotas, and spends a lot of time writing reports about the benefits of diversity (U.T. spent “months of study and deliberation, including retreats, interviews [and] review of data,” Kennedy tells us approvingly), its affirmative-action program will survive.
Eric
Hi Eric, Emily and Will,
What I have always found fascinating about Fisher v. U.T. is the extent to which the narrative of a hard-working, young white woman who lost out on a spot at U.T. simply because of her race overtook the facts of the case. As the case made its way through the courts, the wholesome-looking Abigail Fisher said: “There were people in my class with lower grades who weren't in all the activities I was in, who were being accepted into U.T., and the only other difference between us was the color of our skin. I was taught from the time I was a little girl that any kind of discrimination was wrong. And for an institution of higher learning to act this way makes no sense to me. What kind of example does it set for others?”
But in the court filings, Fisher's lawyers spent almost no time arguing that she'd been denied admission to U.T. because of her race. In fact, when I interviewed her attorney, Edward Blum, in 2013, he told me that Fisher's grades and test scores, which were not stellar, made it hard to argue race alone kept her out. Blum admitted to me that “there are some Anglo students who had lower grades than Abby who were admitted also. Litigation like this is not a black-and-white paradigm.”
Hold up. If white students with lower grades and test scores than Fisher got in over her, how could a case make it all the way to the Supreme Court based on the claim that a white woman was passed over simply because of her race? The real problem, Blum told me, was not that unqualified black and Latino students had edged Fisher out, but that U.T. used race in any capacity in its admissions process.
That is a blockbuster admission, and obviously, a very different, less explosive premise than the age-worn story of affirmative action taking slots from worthy white people. Because what is also true, but underreported, is that white students under U.T.'s admissions program can also get credit for their race under certain circumstances. The university says that its consideration of race can benefit any student, “even nonminorities.” For example, race could benefit a white applicant who attended a high school where he or she was a racial minority. The 14th Amendment requires that Americans be treated the same, regardless of race, and if white and black and Latino students can all get extra points for their race under U.T.'s program, it is hard to see how it was discriminatory in the first place.
Outside of the court's ruling, I think the Fisher case should cause reporters to pause and question how the narrative of Fisher stuck in defiance of the facts.
Nikole

