When the New York City Education Department put a new Success Academy charter school in a building housing a troubled Brooklyn middle school in 2012, many believed the middle school was on its way to closing.
The school, Junior High School 50, known as John D. Wells, had struggled for years. In 2014, Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, included it on a list of 94 chronically low-performing schools that the city was infusing with money and social services. Only 49 students were admitted last year.
But instead of dying, J.H.S. 50, in the Williamsburg neighborhood, is showing signs of revival.
A new principal has added programs and activities. The school is hopeful about its performance on this year's standardized tests. And for the first time in many years, enrollment is expected to increase — 112 sixth graders are registered for September — a sign that parents like what they see happening there.
Now, in a twist, even as it grows, J.H.S. 50 will have to give up five classrooms next year, because the Success Academy school is expanding to fifth grade.
Supporters of J.H.S. 50 are accusing the Education Department of betting against a turnaround. Last year, when it approved Success' expansion, the department drew up a plan assuming that J.H.S. 50's enrollment would continue to decline, to as few as 165 students next year. The department is now projecting that the school will have around 230 students. The principal, Benjamin Honoroff, believes that enrollment could be as high as 270, given transfers and so-called over-the-counter students — often new immigrants who arrive in the middle of the year and are assigned to J.H.S. 50 because of its transitional bilingual program.
“We doubled our incoming sixth-grade class,” Mr. Honoroff said. “So I think that an equitable allocation would mean reconsidering some of those decisions.”
City Councilman Antonio Reynoso, who graduated from J.H.S. 50 in 1996, when it had close to 1,100 students, said that when the department made the plan, it promised to adjust it if enrollment increased.
“They said yes, that they would do that, and now we're facing that issue right now and they're saying no,” Mr. Reynoso, a Democrat whose district includes Williamsburg, said in an interview.
“They assumed that that wasn't going to happen,” he added.
Success Academy, through a spokesman, disputed the idea that space was unfairly allocated. The spokesman, Stefan Friedman, said that the charter school expected to add 110 students next year, and that even if J.H.S. 50 reached an enrollment of 270, the two schools would have roughly the same number of students per classroom. He said that the department's space allocations generally disfavored charter schools, and that several other Success schools in the city had many more students per classroom than traditional public schools in the same buildings.
Over the past two decades, as the surrounding area evolved from a neighborhood of bodegas and discount stores, where half the residents received public assistance, into one of multimillion-dollar apartments and popular restaurants, J.H.S. 50 was largely left behind.
Its students are mostly Hispanic and poor. Thirty-one percent have disabilities, and 29 percent do not speak English proficiently. In 2015, soon after J.H.S. 50 became part of Mr. de Blasio's school improvement effort, which the administration calls Renewal Schools, only 10 percent of the students passed the state reading tests and only 7 percent passed the math test.
While the Renewal program as a whole has had mixed results, there are signs of progress at J.H.S. 50. The school was paired with a community organization called El Puente, which brought in new staff members to work on improving attendance, increasing parent engagement, training students in conflict mediation, and using art to help students in the bilingual program learn English.
Mr. Honoroff, who became principal last year after working as a literacy coach at the school, instituted new math and English curriculums, added small-group reading interventions for all students four times a week, and made room in the schedule for teachers to meet in teams several times a week to examine students' work. While scores from this spring's state tests are not back yet, students made substantial improvement on internal reading tests during the year. Mr. Honoroff has also made debate a major focus, and the school's debate team recently won a citywide competition.
To tackle its low attendance rate, J.H.S. 50 has paired frequently absent students with staff mentors, who call students or visit them at home when they do not show up and offer positive reinforcement when they do. The rate of chronic absenteeism — the share of students whose attendance is below 90 percent — declined to 31 percent in 2015-16 from 40 percent in 2014-15.
J.H.S. 50 is also using the extra hour that all the schools in the Renewal program have added to their day to make going to school more appealing. Students can choose from a wide variety of extracurricular activities, including robotics, video game design, dance, mural painting, rock band and sports like soccer, baseball and basketball.
Mr. Honoroff is worried about losing dedicated space for some of those activities as the school struggles to fit into a smaller footprint next year. J.H.S. 50 will probably have to turn its dance studio into a regular classroom. It is likely to lose a new computer lab Mr. Reynoso financed. And several rooms will need to do double duty, as both a classroom and a music room, for instance.
To be sure, many schools in the city, both public and charter, struggle with space constraints. And the elementary school to which J.H.S. 50 is losing space, Success Academy Williamsburg, performs much better on state tests. Last year, 80 percent of its third graders — then its top grade — passed the reading tests and 99 percent passed the math tests. (The charter school has more white students and middle-class students, and fewer disabled students and students not proficient in English, than J.H.S. 50.)
One morning last week, Mr. Honoroff pointed out five classrooms assigned to Success this past year that he said went unused and three others that he said were used only sporadically, for occupational therapy.
A spokeswoman for the Education Department, Devora Kaye, said that the department was committed to supporting J.H.S. 50's growth and that it would review space requirements after enrollment numbers were confirmed in October. In the meantime, she said, the department would help the principal with renovations and room conversions to make the space work this year.
But Mr. Reynoso said that having to squeeze into fewer classrooms could hurt the school's ability to increase enrollment further.
“We're about to take away space that they were using to attract parents,” he said.

