A giant torso welcomes visitors to Storm King Art Center, the 500-acre sculpture park in New Windsor in Orange County. Made of perforated stainless steel, it is an architectural structure in the form of a blazer, dress shirt and tie. An archway through its center leads to a small garden lined with white gravel and bordered by hedges. The garden's T-shape mimics the imagined shadow of the torso with arms outstretched.
The installation is the first full execution of “Entrance to a Garden” as it was conceived in 2002 by Dennis Oppenheim, an artist who produced earthworks, body art, conceptual art and other projects more difficult to classify in a career that lasted more than 40 years. “Dennis Oppenheim: Terrestrial Studio,” one of Storm King's two special exhibitions for 2016, examines his multifaceted engagement with outdoor spaces. The show brings together sculpture, installation, film, photography and sound in the indoor galleries at Storm King, along with seven sculptural installations placed around the park's rolling fields.
“Terrestrial Studio” encourages visitors to explore. It is organized by David R. Collens, the center's director and chief curator; Nora Lawrence, curator; and Theresa Choi, assistant curator, in consultation with Amy Plumb Oppenheim, Oppenheim's widow and the director of his estate. In Storm King's North Woods area, “Architectural Cactus Grove, #1-6,” from 2008, is a cluster of six whimsical sculptures that seem to be frolicking in a clearing. To the west in the park, the lime green “Electric Kiss,” also from 2008, stands 10 feet tall in a meadow, its shape evoking an onion dome, or a teardrop, or a Hershey's Kiss.
On a grassy slope in the South Fields, 50 four-foot-wide wooden stars lie flat on the ground across two acres. The installation, “Wishing the Mountains Madness,” was created in 1977 at the University of Montana in Missoula, where Oppenheim was a visiting artist from New York City.
“Here he was in this completely bucolic landscape thinking: ‘I want there to be some urban energy here. I want to wish the mountains madness,'” Ms. Lawrence, the curator, said. “So he let the stars fall down from the sky.”
On the slope where the stars are strewn, it is impossible to see more than a few at once. In the galleries, an aerial photograph of the original installation in Missoula offers a more comprehensive view.
This is one way that the indoor and outdoor components of “Terrestrial Studio” complement each other. Inside are other iterations of the outdoor installations, including a smaller version of an architectural shirt and drawings of “Electric Kiss” and “Cactus #6.” One gallery features 43 sketches of the fantastical natural elements designed by Oppenheim in 2006 for his series “Alternative Landscape Components” in the North Woods, selections of those components — tubular trees and angular boulders — form an alternative landscape of their own.
The galleries contain documentation of some of Oppenheim's earlier, more ephemeral land-based works. The photograph “Pretty Ideas,” from 1974, captures 850 feet of colored flares spelling out those two words as they burned for 10 minutes along the Long Island Expressway. Elsewhere, a topographic map, floor plan and black-and-white photograph chronicle Oppenheim's “Gallery Transplant” from 1969. The piece, which existed for four hours, involved transposing the full-size floor plan of a gallery at Cornell University onto an adjacent snowy space, highlighting the shift in perspective and scale.
Oppenheim's “A Sound Enclosed Land Area,” also from 1969, bridges the indoors and the outdoors. The gallery display is a reel-to-reel audiotape and a map indicating a triangular path in Milan. Playing around the entrance to Storm King's visitor center is the sound of footsteps — the very ones Oppenheim recorded as he walked the route on the Italian map.
In 1967, Oppenheim sketched his concept for “Dead Furrow,” one of what he called “viewing stations,” raised platforms where people could stand and look around. The rendering hangs upstairs in Storm King's Museum Building. Though the piece was built as a scale model and an indoor platform in a gallery, it had never been constructed at full scale outdoors until now.
One of Oppenheim's stipulations was that “Dead Furrow” be located on flat ground with the environment visible for at least a mile in all directions. The South Fields at Storm King met that criteria, and the installation sits there, a massive trapezoidal object framed by rows of aqua PVC pipes. From a distance, the work looks like a truncated pyramid. A stairway bisecting the structure permits visitors to climb to the top to take in the glorious vistas.
“The idea is that it's not just a sculpture itself,” Ms. Lawrence said, “but a place where viewers can become part of the work while looking out at the expanse around them.”
Perspective can be confounding at Storm King, where from afar, monumental sculptures can be concealed by the tip of one's thumb. Addressing the complexity and allure of measurement, Josephine Halvorson produced three site-specific installations situated across the grounds. Each titled “Measure,” they comprise “Outlooks: Josephine Halvorson,” Storm King's second special 2016 exhibition, also curated by Ms. Lawrence. Ms. Halvorson is the fourth participant in the Outlooks series, which invites an emerging or midcareer artist to create a temporary, site-specific work at Storm King.
Each “Measure” is a large-scale wooden ruler that challenges notions of size, time and distance. In the South Fields, the longest of the three, at 36 feet, is painted bright yellow with black lines and numbers. From a distance it resembles a traditional yardstick propped up horizontally in the grass.
“I was hoping it would align with certain natural features that you could almost measure — the length of the ridge of a mountain or the distance between trees,” Ms. Halvorson said, standing beside the piece. “It is always changing based on your orientation to it.”
Nearby, another “Measure” rises vertically in the middle of a circle of trees. This one is 12 feet tall and appears to be white but is in fact a pattern of rainbow-hued daubs that shimmer in the sunlight. Metallic black Roman numerals read I to XII from bottom to top.
“I was thinking of it as a sundial,” Ms. Halvorson said, “a place to measure time as well as height.”
A visitor might miss the “Measure” in the North Woods. Set within a grove of trees, it is painted as a trompe l'oeil tree trunk. On one face is a full-length red double-headed arrow, with the number 24 indicating its height in feet.
“By being a representation of a tree, but also at its literal height, it can serve as a key or a legend to the surrounding trees to get a sense of their scale,” Ms. Halvorson said.
As an artist who often paints from life, Ms. Halvorson is practiced at paying attention to her surroundings. “My work has to do with understanding how to conceive of the world through observation,” she said. “I have made these instruments to enact that. They give a way to understand your own height and the size of your body in relation to the landscape, whether natural or artistic.”

