BALTIMORE — Barry G. Williams knows how to make a strong case against a police officer. He spent eight years working for the civil rights division of the Justice Department, where he investigated, tried and convicted officers accused of brutality and civil rights violations.
Legal experts say that left him uniquely qualified to find himself at the center of the sprawling prosecution of the six officers charged in the fatal arrest of Freddie Gray — but perhaps not in the way some might have expected.
On the one hand, his background reflects an unquestioned sensitivity to the issues of police behavior and the rights of individuals who come in contact with them, like Mr. Gray, the 25-year-old black man whose death from a spinal cord injury that occurred while in police custody caused riots and chaos a year ago. But experts say it has also made Judge Williams a meticulous evaluator of a prosecution case that was in trouble even before his Thursday ruling acquitting Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr. of seven charges, including second-degree murder, because he knows the burden of proof all too well.
“He has an understanding of what police can and cannot do,” said Barry Kowalski, who prosecuted the Los Angeles officers accused of beating Rodney King and worked with Judge Williams at the Justice Department. “And at the same time, he has an understanding that the government must have evidence that proves guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.”
Judge Williams’s ruling and an earlier acquittal from the bench of Officer Edward M. Nero have made it clear that a man who has put together winning prosecutions against police officers has not seen a convincing case against those two officers.
“As a trier of fact,” Judge Williams wrote, in his ruling Thursday, “the Court cannot simply let things speak for themselves.”
Judge Williams, who is African-American, has to an unusual degree become the nucleus of the proceedings. He is both presiding over the cases and has ruled from the bench in two of the three tried so far. (A jury deadlocked in the first case of Officer William G. Porter.)
That has made the judge both the sole fact finder and the person whose rulings have shaped the case both for the world and for the lawyers arguing the case.
A graduate of the University of Maryland School of Law, where he is remembered as being well prepared to answer professors’ questions, Judge Williams spent eight years as an assistant state’s attorney in Baltimore before he joined the Department of Justice, where he prosecuted cases against police officers and prison guards accused of brutality.
“He dedicated himself to making sure that people in power did not victimize those who did not have power, and that was something very important to him,” Mr. Kowalski said.
In the federal system, it takes months, if not years to build a case — far longer than the 12 days after Mr. Gray’s death that it took prosecutors here to announce charges against the six police officers involved in Mr. Gray’s arrest — and Judge Williams knew when not to bring one.
“I remember conversations where I detected that he was eager to try to bring a prosecution, but ultimately, in the course of our discussion, we both recognized the evidence was just not sufficient to make the wrong that we perceived into a criminal act,” Mr. Kowalski said. “And we both went, ‘Doggone it.’ ”
Still, Judge Williams tried and won cases like one, in Florida, involving a police officer accused of pistol-whipping a drug dealer who was already on the ground.
“He worked in, I would say, a methodical but effective style,” said Douglas Molloy, a former federal prosecutor who worked with Judge Williams on that case. “Instead of focusing on the more dramatic aspects of cases, he concentrated on the elements of the crime.”
That could explain the tenor of Judge Williams’s rulings — which deliberately lay out the charges and the evidence — and his brusque questioning of the prosecutors who alleged Mr. Gray had a “rough ride,” a dramatic term that he would find they did not substantiate in court.
“The state said to the world, it was a rough ride,” said Judge Williams, interrupting a prosecutor’s rebuttal statement at the end of the trial, before unleashing a torrent of questions about the prosecution’s allegations. “Where’s your evidence?” Judge Williams asked.
But some here have wondered if Judge Williams’s experience investigating police officers at the federal level has made it harder to convince him of a strong case here.
“When you work for D.O.J., your standards of prosecution are exceedingly high,” said Douglas Colbert, a professor of law at the University of Maryland who is supportive of the prosecution. As a result, Mr. Colbert said, the judge could be looking for something more persuasive “to meet the burden of proof than is ordinarily required in state prosecutions.”
Judge Williams, 54, was appointed to the city’s Circuit Court in 2005 and now holds an elected position.
Most mornings, he appears on the bench 15 minutes or so after he scheduled proceedings to begin, fortified by a giant mug of tea. Sharp-witted and acerbic, Judge Williams can be as quick to crack jokes from the bench as he can be to admonish the individuals in front of him for acting outside the neatly drawn lines of his expectations.
There was the moment when he eviscerated prosecutors for failing to disclose a piece of “classic exculpatory information” to defense lawyers before Officer Goodson’s trial. “If your office doesn’t get that, I don’t know where we are at this point, counsel,” Judge Williams said.
A few days later, he rebuked a witness, Dr. Morris Marc Soriano, calling him “sarcastic” under questioning from a defense lawyer.
“Sir, don’t say anything right now,” Judge Williams snapped.
He has taken unusual measures to limit the flow of information from the courtroom, ostensibly to prevent the proceedings in one of the six cases from tainting a jury pool for another, like conducting the questioning of potential jurors out of earshot of the public, and by speaking quietly with lawyers at the bench, instead of in open court, even when there was no jury.
There has been some speculation as to whether Judge Williams’ familiarity with the case could prompt either prosecutors or defense lawyers to doubt his ability to continue considering the cases independently — a must for judges — and seek his recusal from future trials, although legal experts said it was unlikely to happen without signs of obvious bias.
Still, Judge Williams nodded to that possibility himself last month, during closing arguments in the trial of Officer Nero, when a prosecutor made a reference to a future trial in the proceedings.
He answered with a quick aside, which elicited laughter in the court but could have been wishful thinking: “I probably won’t be involved,” he said.

