CLEVELAND — The victory party commenced Sunday night after the Cleveland Cavaliers defeated the Golden State Warriors, 93-89, to become the first team to rally from a three-games-to-one deficit to win the N.B.A. finals, and it has only grown in size and stature since.
It spread to I-X Center near Cleveland Hopkins International Airport on Monday afternoon as thousands of fans welcomed home the Cavaliers after the team had detoured to Las Vegas for a celebration of its own at XS nightclub. Traffic jams and sparse parking did not deter fans, some of whom had waited out the 52 years since a Cleveland sports team last delivered a major professional championship. Some simply drove onto the lawn lining the highway and walked a mile or more to the landing spot, high-fiving their brethren and letting out whoops of relief along the way.
The center of the party, though, has been downtown Cleveland, home of the Cavaliers’ Quicken Loans Arena. On Wednesday morning, fans clad in wine and gold flooded the streets for a championship parade that was scheduled for 11 a.m. but started late because of an estimated crowd of more than 1.3 million people crowding the routes. There were 77 units in the parade, which featured the Cavaliers, the former Cleveland Browns stars Jim Brown, Bernie Kosar and Earnest Byner, the Ohio State football coach Urban Meyer, the Buckeyes’ marching band and more. It lasted over four hours and was followed by a rally in a public mall area that extended well past 4:30 p.m.
Cavaliers General Manager David Griffin addressed the crowd, drawing loud cheers when he said, “The shot, the drive, the fumble all must now be replaced by the block, the 3 and the D.”
Mayor Frank G. Jackson of Cleveland congratulated the team on its “against all odds” N.B.A. finals victory and presented the Cavaliers with an official proclamation and keys to the city.
“The strength and determination displayed throughout the season, postseason and championship game are truly the embodiment of our city and its people,” he said in a statement before the parade. “A city and a people with heart.”
Several streets were closed, so officials urged fans to leave early and take public transportation, or stay downtown Tuesday night, fearing long backups on each major artery heading into the city. By Tuesday afternoon, however, hotel rooms were sold out.
Many former Cleveland residents, like Angela Meros, who grew up in Euclid, Ohio, but now lives in Chicago, flew in for the parade. Long lines for public transportation from the airport to downtown threatened to keep her away, but she arrived in time to catch the players’ floats.
Meros, 37, had also flown in for Games 4, 6 and 7, not wanting to miss the celebration 52 years in the making.
“Growing up a Clevelander, I’ve prayed for this moment for our city and always had faith in LeBron,” she said, referring to LeBron James, who was named the most valuable player of the N.B.A. finals. “I cried right along with him at the end of the game.”
The parade began at Quicken Loans Arena, wrapped around the Indians’ Progressive Field, headed up East Ninth Street, turned down East Lakeside Avenue and finished near the Cleveland Convention Center, where a stage was set up on the mall area that stretches three city blocks behind it.
Several businesses downtown, including the theaters at Playhouse Square, closed for the day because of the crowds, which were for the most part well behaved during the parade, although afterward, a woman was shot twice in the leg near Public Square, the police said, and a suspect was in custody. Before that, the biggest problem, according to the police, was children getting separated from their parents. The police posted several messages on Twitter alerting parents to their children’s whereabouts. Public transportation also experienced heavy backups as fans tried to make their way home.
Still, all over Northeast Ohio, the good feelings have failed to dissipate. The only documented discontent has been over the planned removal of the football-field-size banner of James, which has hung on the Sherwin-Williams building near the arena since James returned to Cleveland in 2014. The company plans to remove the banner on July 5 and replace it with a red-white-and-blue banner celebrating the company’s 150 years. After an uproar on social media and a petition signed by more than 7,000 people, the company said it would put the banner back up in time for next season.
James, 31, can become a free agent if he decides not to exercise the one-year, $24 million player’s option in his contract on June 29, but he told Cleveland.com before the parade that he was happy and had “no plans to go nowhere at this point.”
Richard Jefferson, 36, said after the finals victory that he planned to retire, but on Wednesday fans chanted, “One more year,” and he responded, “O.K.” Earlier in the day, he said on “The Dan Patrick Show” that his plans were not set in stone.
Meanwhile, Cavaliers merchandise is in heavy demand, and retailers like GV Art & Design, which is selling championship T-shirts with the slogans “Party Like It’s 1964” and “You Can’t Spell Miracle Without CLE,” cannot keep up. Lines have wrapped around the retail store in Lakewood, Ohio, since early Monday morning, and the doors have stayed open well past closing time. Business is even better online.
“Been sending out 500 a day,” the company wrote on Twitter. “We stopped today knowing today’s orders wouldn’t make it for the parade. Doing our best!”
The “Ultimate Warrior” T-shirt, from the Ohio-based clothing shop Homage, that James was wearing when he stepped off the plane, in a presumed dig at Golden State, sold out as well.
Record-breaking sales were also reported on Fanatics.com, NBAStore.com and the flagship NBA Store in New York. In the first 24 hours after Game 7, according to Fanatics, sales of Cavaliers championship merchandise doubled compared with the record set last year during the first 24 hours after the Warriors clinched.
Looking to extend the party, the Indians, who are in first place in the American League Central, said Tuesday that they would celebrate their neighbors’ success by selling $16 upper-deck tickets (based upon the Cavaliers’ slogan, “All In 216,” which references the city’s area code) for Wednesday night’s game against the Tampa Bay Rays. The Indians won, 6-1, to take six straight over all and 11 in a row at Progressive Field. Then on Thursday night, the nearby city of Akron is hosting a celebration for James, who grew up there.
“The Indians are next!” suddenly optimistic Cleveland fans yelled during the parade. Indeed, on a sun-soaked day on the shores of Lake Erie, the cloud of despair had been lifted.

