Carnegie Hall announced on Wednesday that it was renaming its first level of boxes the Blavatnik Family First Tier in recognition of a $25 million gift from Len Blavatnik, a trustee there since 2014, and his family foundation.
It was a coda of sorts to the boardroom drama that erupted last year when Ronald O. Perelman abruptly stepped down as Carnegie's chairman after clashing with the hall's administrative staff and other board members.
One flash point came when he questioned the hall's involvement with a $100,000 prize given out by Warner Music. The company is owned by a firm founded by Mr. Blavatnik, which had beaten out a bid that Mr. Perelman was involved with. Mr. Perelman questioned whether the prize, which was to go to a young musician who had played at Carnegie, had been sufficiently vetted for potential conflicts, since it involved a business controlled by a board member. A legal review Carnegie commissioned later concluded that the episode had not raised governance concerns.
Mr. Perelman, who had given generously to Carnegie in the past and had been expected to donate another $30 million, left after less than a year in the position. The hall, whose goal was to raise $125 million to support its artistic, educational and digital initiatives by May, when it celebrated its 125th anniversary, extended its fund-raising timeline to the end of next June.
Mr. Blavatnik, the founder and chairman of Access Industries, a privately held group, stepped in with a new lead gift of $25 million, bringing the tally to $55 million.
“It is important to me and my family that the hall continue to thrive, bringing together artists and audiences for exceptional musical experiences and creating programs to engage and inspire the next generation of musicians and music lovers,” Mr. Blavatnik said in a statement.
Clive Gillinson, Carnegie's executive and artistic director, said in an interview that he was grateful to Mr. Blavatnik, noting that he had been “a significant supporter of Carnegie Hall for quite some time.” The hall named Robert F. Smith, a private equity titan with an interest in music education, its new chairman this month.
The first tier — home of 33 boxes with small anterooms — will bear the Blavatnik name for 50 years. The new name will be unveiled Oct. 6 on opening night, when some patrons will be able to sit in the Blavatnik Family First Tier and watch Gustavo Dudamel conduct the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela down below, on the Ronald O. Perelman stage.

