The force that gives one couture house, or one fashion designer, the power to shape the tastes of women has always verged on the magical — sometimes literally.
When the French couturier Christian Dior was a teenager in Normandy, a fortuneteller told him, “You will be poor, but you will achieve success through women.”
He was, apparently, “mystified” by the prediction, or so it is revealed in “Couture Confessions,” a collection of posthumous conversations between the author, Pamela Golbin, the chief curator of fashion and textiles at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, and 11 fashion eminences of the 20th century, including Paul Poiret, Jeanne Lanvin, Madeleine Vionnet, Dior, Coco Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent and Alexander McQueen.
But Ms. Golbin did not need to consult a fortuneteller (or a Ouija board) to channel her subjects. The couturiers may no longer be living, but each left behind hundreds of opinionated, character-filled interviews (and, in some cases, autobiographies), making it possible for her to invent tailor-made questions about their challenges and creative processes and then provide answers in their recorded words.
While this may sound a mite peculiar, it works convincingly, rather like an extended séance in which the dressmakers visit Ms. Golbin, one after another, and share their secrets. The book is enhanced with black-and-white drawings by the illustrator Yann Legendre. And as you read it, you feel like a boulevardier in present-day Paris, sitting at a cafe and leafing through a magazine chock-full of revelations.
The most charming of Ms. Goldin's subjects is probably Poiret, the “king of fashion” in the Belle Époque, who is quoted speaking with entertaining false humility about his renown. “Some have been good enough to say that I exercised a powerful influence over my age, and inspired an entire generation,” he said. While it would be “presumptuous” to agree, “If memory serves, when I started out all color was absent from fashion,” he added.
A more modest contemporary of Poiret's, Jeanne Lanvin, acknowledged her expertise at the robe de style, the favorite of brides and prom queens everywhere: a “clinging bodice rising above a billowing skirt of rich or dainty fabric.” But, she said, “I very much prefer that my work shall speak for me.”
The British designer Alexander McQueen characterized his double-duty life, running his own house in London and Givenchy in Paris, as a kind of madness, saying: “I'm not tortured, I'm schizophrenic. I express the collision of my contradictions: romanticism encased in sadomasochism, for example.”
“All my work is biographical in some sense,” the collection quotes McQueen, who committed suicide in February 2010, as saying. “It has to be; otherwise there is no soul to it.”
Coco Chanel, frank and combative as always, attacked the miniskirt as “an exhibition of meat,” but upheld the primacy of the “spirit of Paris” as fashion's supreme instigator.
“The genius of the French, in matters of fashion, has always been to be its wellspring,” she said. “Draw as much water as you want, but you can't walk off with the fountain.” This may be why she didn't mind when people copied her designs. “Every imitation has its basis in love for the original,” she said.
Pierre Balmain liked to say that “a couturier should let his work speak for itself,” but like Lanvin, he could not resist the temptation to verbally embellish his fashions. And neither could the rest of them — with the exception of the notoriously closemouthed Cristóbal Balenciaga, whose chapter Ms. Golbin fills with admiring commentary by Cecil Beaton, John Fairchild, Diana Vreeland, Coco Chanel and other tastemakers.
She hit upon the idea for the book in 2009, after curating a retrospective in Paris on Madeleine Vionnet, inventor of the bias cut, which gave a “supple, easy and promising” fluidity to fabric, freeing women from the armature of pre-World War I designs. For the exhibition catalog, Ms. Golbin explained to Hamish Bowles, European editor at large for American Vogue, that she devised a “conversation” with Vionnet — the lively, chatty dressmaker (who died in 1976) — folding in the couturière's previously published comments. Readers felt such a connection, they sent her letters addressed to Vionnet, assuming she was still alive.
“Hearing them speak creates a dialogue, a conversation,” Ms. Golbin said. “I wanted to give the reader access into the private studio of each of these designers, to learn more about them and what makes them tick.”
Yves Saint Laurent once said: “Couture is a multitude of whispered secrets. Few have the privilege of transmitting them.” In “Couture Confessions,” Ms. Golbin removes the barrier, making visible the secrets that lurk in the dresses we once wore.

