WIMBLEDON, England — Andy Murray is the only British man to win the Wimbledon singles title since 1936. Last year he led Britain to its first Davis Cup championship since 1936. He has been figurehead and head cheerleader for British tennis for most of his career.
Before Tuesday, Murray had never faced another British player at Wimbledon. In fact, he had not played a fellow Briton in a tour-level match until he defeated Aljaz Bedene and Kyle Edmund this month on his way to winning the tournament at Queen’s Club.
His opponent Tuesday was Liam Broady, a 22-year-old ranked 235th whom Murray knows well and with whom he has practiced. But friendship and patriotic camaraderie only go so far after the first ball is hit.
Murray, the No. 2 seed, was ruthless once the match began. He won the first three games and 14 of the first 15 points on his way to a 6-2, 6-3, 6-4 victory.
“As much as I was saying it’s just another guy on the other side of the court in the run-up to the match, that I’m just going to focus on hitting the tennis ball, you’re still playing Andy Murray on Centre Court Wimbledon,” Broady said. “It’s very hard to get your head around that.”
Still, Broady said he thought he would be a lot more nervous than he was. “I felt at home from the start,” he said. “I didn’t play like I was at home from the start, but I certainly felt like it.”
Fifteen British players, many given wild cards, were in the singles draws, including nine men, the most since 2006. Four have advanced to the second round, with the highest-ranked British women, Johanna Konta and Heather Watson, yet to complete their first-round matches after play was suspended in the afternoon because of rain.
Tara Moore, a 23-year-old British wild card ranked 227th, won her first main-draw match at a Grand Slam tournament, defeating Alison van Uytvanck, 6-3, 6-2.
Moore was born in Hong Kong and grew up in the United States, training at Nick Bollettieri’s tennis academy. But she has lived in England in recent years and said she feels “very British.”
That includes cheering for her countrymen and women.
“I want every British player to do well,” Moore said. “They’re all my friends. I want them to do the best.”
At his match, Murray was back in cheerleader mode, too. Broady said Murray asked him if he enjoyed it.
“Yeah, of course I did,” Broady said. “I played Andy Murray on Centre Court, what can’t I enjoy? Obviously, I didn’t enjoy the losing part, but it was a great experience.”
“Enjoy it” has been Murray’s advice to many fellow Britons. He said it about James Ward before he played No. 1 Novak Djokovic on Monday. And Murray said it again Tuesday when asked about Marcus Willis, the 772nd-ranked qualifier who has an appointment with Roger Federer on Centre Court on Wednesday in the second round.
Willis, who teaches tennis lessons at Warwick Boat Club, may be the only active coach in the main singles draws, but Amra Sadikovic was a tennis coach not long ago. Two years ago, she retired because it was no longer fun to toil in the lower levels of pro tennis. She found a job at a tennis club in Basel, Switzerland.
Sadikovic spent more than a year away, but was inspired to come back by another Swiss player, 11th-ranked Timea Bacsinszky, who has been successful since returning to the tour after a hiatus.
On Tuesday, Sadikovic’s comeback reached Centre Court, where she played Serena Williams, the defending champion.
Sadikovic, 27, had never played a main draw match at Wimbledon, or any other Grand Slam tournament, and her ranking of 148th is a career high.
But she won the first two points of the match and even had two break-point opportunities in the first game before Williams settled into a groove on her way to a 6-2, 6-4 victory. It was Williams’s first match since losing the final at the French Open earlier this month.
“It was a good start for me,” said the top-seeded Williams, who has not won a Grand Slam title since last year’s Wimbledon. “I felt like it was a solid start to go in the right direction.”
Williams said she was well prepared for Sadikovic’s “old-school grass-court game.”
“I felt I was where I needed to be,” Williams added. “I needed to be pumped for the match. I needed to be intense. I needed to show a lot and feel a lot on the court.”
Sadikovic listed Williams among the players she admired most and said it was an honor to play her. In the final points of the match, both players were smiling as each hit backhand winners that clipped the baseline.
Sadikovic was used to watching Williams on television. But Broady said such a viewpoint can make the top players seem superhuman.
After 1 hour 43 minutes of being 80 feet away from Murray on Centre Court, Broady said that he felt as if he belonged, and that Murray seemed like just another guy.
“I don’t feel like I was completely outplayed today,” Broady said. “I don’t feel like I was completely overawed. I felt like I was a man playing against another man.”
Among the men’s matches completed before play was suspended on the outside courts, No. 4 Stan Wawrinka ousted the American teenager Taylor Fritz, 7-6 (4), 6-1, 6-7 (2), 6-4; No. 7 Richard Gasquet topped Bedene, 6-3, 6-4, 6-3; and No. 15 Nick Kyrgios outlasted Radek Stepanek, 6-4, 6-3, 6-7 (9), 6-1.
In the women’s draw, No. 6 Roberta Vinci defeated Alison Riske of the United States, 6-2, 5-7, 6-3; and No. 13 Svetlana Kuznetsova beat Caroline Wozniacki, 7-5, 6-4. Wozniacki returned this month after being out since March with injuries. Ranked 45th, she was unseeded at a Grand Slam event for the first time since the 2008 Australian Open.

