Nothing sets the mood for romance like a Supreme Court ruling.
In the year since the court established nationwide gay marriage rights, there has been a drastic increase in the proportion of marriages among same-sex couples who live together — even in states where such couples already had the option to wed.
Before the ruling, issued a year ago this Sunday, 38 percent of cohabiting gay couples nationwide were married, the polling organization Gallup found. In the year since that ruling, known as Obergefell v. Hodges, that share rose to 49 percent.
The rise was more pronounced in states where same-sex marriage had not been legal before the ruling — 13 percentage points. But it also rose substantially, by 10 percentage points, in states where gay couples previously had the option to wed.
The organization did not explore why that might be, though in many states where same-sex marriage had already been legal, the option was relatively new and its long-term status uncertain.
The bump in same-sex marriages following the ruling may be easing, however.
“More recent data collected since Gallup's initial update on same-sex marriages in November show the growth in same-sex marriages may be leveling off,” the organization said this week.
The share of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender adults who reported being married to a same-sex partner rose from 7.9 percent before the ruling to 9.5 percent by Gallup's November update. Since then, the share of such couples who are married has barely budged, standing at 9.6 percent in the recent poll.
“The Obergefell v. Hodges ruling appears to have provided the impetus for an initial surge in same-sex marriages, but that surge only lasted a short while,” Gallup said.
Same-sex marriage is more common among gay men than among lesbians, the organization found. While 10.5 percent of gay men surveyed were married, just 8.8 percent of lesbians reported the same. Still, both shares were substantially higher than they were a year ago.
Nearly half of all L.G.B.T. adults — 49.9 percent — identified as being single or never married, Gallup found.
The results are based on more than 16,000 telephone surveys conducted with L.G.B.T. adults nationwide between Jan. 28, 2015, and last Sunday.

