FRONT PAGE
Because of a production error, the continuation of an article about a sit-in by House Democrats was omitted from some copies on Thursday. The complete article can be found at nytimes.com/us. Also because of a production error, Pages A4 and B4 were reversed in some copies. Though the continuation of an article about transgender bathroom rights in a town in Mexico appeared on Page A10 in all editions, the beginning of the article erroneously appeared in the Business section in some copies. The complete article can be found at nytimes.com/world.
•
An article on Tuesday about the Orlando police department’s continuing defense of how it handled the nightclub massacre that left 49 people dead and 53 wounded misspelled the surname of a survivor who discussed law enforcement’s efforts the night of the shooting. He is Norman Casiano, not Caisano.
BUSINESS DAY
A news analysis article on Thursday about politically inspired questioning of the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, at a House hearing misstated the given name of a member of Congress from Washington State. He is Denny Heck, not Danny.
•
An article on Thursday about resistance by insurers to payment for alternative pain treatments misidentified the medical specialty of Dr. Steven Feinberg, who commented on the issue. He is a specialist in physical medicine, not a psychiatrist.
•
The Economic Scene column on Wednesday, about challenges facing the European Union whether or not Britain elects to withdraw, gave an outdated academic affiliation in some copies for Kevin O’Rourke, who commented on the issue. He is an economic historian at the University of Oxford, no longer at Trinity College in Dublin.
SPORTS
An article on Monday about the performance of Minnesota Twins first baseman Joe Mauer this season overstated the significance of his three batting titles as a catcher. He was the first American League catcher to win multiple batting titles; it is not the case that “no catcher had won multiple batting titles” until Mauer did. (Ernie Lombardi won two National League batting titles, in 1938 and 1942.)
THE ARTS
An article on Thursday about the financial performance of four Broadway shows misstated the cost of producing one of them. “American Psycho” cost $8.8 million to produce, not $9.8 million.
OPINON
Because of an editing error, a letter on Saturday about rape and intoxication misspelled the surname of the writer whose essay prompted the letter. She is Emily Bazelon, not Bazelton.
The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.comor (212) 556-7652.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

