This weekend, the haute couture shows start in Paris — and a handful of new names will be welcomed to the fold. The members of Paris's Chambre Syndicale de la Haute Couture have picked five guest designers to join the calendar for the season and stage shows. (Also of note: Giles Deacon, who set aside his ready-to-wear line for fall 2016, will be holding a series of presentations.) Here's a rundown of the upcoming crop of participants at couture, which runs July 3 to 7.
The Dutch designer was previously invited to show at Couture Week in 2011, and the otherworldly garments that she sends down the runway on the ready-to-wear schedule are arguably more at home under the auspices of the Chambre Syndicale. For this collection, “I have been exploring the study of cymatics, which visualizes sound waves as evolving geometric patterns,” she says. “The collection shows a variation of organic and three-dimensional structures, new materials and techniques and biomorphic volumes.” She identifies a “dewdrop dress,” which consists of thousands of crystals embedded in a transparent silicone liquid, as a particular challenge. “Getting the material to have the right stretch, thickness and drapiness was a process of continuous experiments and fine tuning.”
The fashion collective founded by Demna Gvasalia in 2014 (who, last October, was appointed the creative director of Balenciaga) will be presenting the Vetements version of couture. It's reportedly a series of designer collaborations with brands like Hanes, Reebok and Levi's, for women and men, and is being billed as a spring/summer 2017 collection (though it won't be on a see now/buy now timeline, but a regular delivery schedule).
The Pompeii-born designer's already ornate and skillfully tailored dresses lend themselves nicely to the French notion of haute couture. He opened his own atelier in 1998, at the age of 23, and regularly shows at Milan Fashion Week — and his garments have reached the music sphere (Madonna, Rihanna and Lady Gaga, to be precise). But his main source of inspiration continues to be Naples; he calls his forthcoming couture collection, which will show on July 3, a trip around his roots. “It's like playing a piano scale: You start on a lower note and then you arrive to the top one,” Scognamiglio says of his progression. “Couture will help me balance my other collections and bring harmony to my entire world.”
A graduate of the Royal Academy of Fine Arts Antwerp, Nakazato started his fashion label in 2009 and opened Tokyo Fashion Week in 2012. His couture debut, which he says was informed by a recent visit to Iceland and its natural phenomena, “is based on the theme of imaginary plants and living organisms from unknown stars,” he says. The garments will use an evolved version of his signature hologram material and incorporate Japanese craftsmanship through both traditional means and technological processes. “The methods and material developed in this couture collection will be made available right away in stores,” he notes. “I am currently planning a new system of combining made-to-order and ready-to-wear. This, I believe, will be the future of fashion in couture.”
“Showing a couture collection in Paris is really a homecoming for me,” says the house's creative director and Paris-raised Gilles Mendel, not to mention an obvious fit for the red-carpet and wedding-aisle favorite. So, for his return to the French capital, Mendel created a collection “inspired by my past, by all the things that informed my taste and sense of style.” He adds: “You can definitely expect to see the most luxurious furs, including Russian Barguzin sable, ermine and natural white chinchilla, used in ways they never have been,” along with handworked gowns, all “inspired by the formal plan of the Tuileries gardens and by my late friend the artist Keith Haring.” Mendel adds that he's excited to show the public what the house has been doing privately for some time now.

