“The Law School Bust” (June 19) by Noam Scheiber looked at the increasing cost of law school, which has left some graduates with large debts at a time that employment prospects have dimmed. The law school at Valparaiso University in Indiana, a focus of the article, has offered buyouts to faculty members and plans to reduce its student body by about a third.
The article attracted 1,346 comments on nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.
I graduated from the Valparaiso School of Law in 1995. The missing piece to the story is that the Valpo Law School has a strong commitment to equity and social justice. The faculty actively seeks out students from underrepresented groups rather than only well-to-do students from highly educated families. Even when I was there, they had a special program to support underrepresented students to help them succeed.
Sherry Faubion, Minnesota
This whole article is ridiculously biased beginning with the choice of Valparaiso as its prime example. Look at the stats and you will find that graduates of law schools in the top two tiers are doing much better at finding good positions than they were a few years earlier. Law school grad unemployment persists only insofar as there are simply too many law schools.
KAStone, Minnesota
Sad for the law school faculty, sad for the former students, sad for the current students. What about the taxpayers who will be stuck for millions when the federal loans these students took out to pay for the exorbitant cost of law schools are forgiven?
Jim Linnane, Bar Harbor, Me.
Too many lawyers! Too few doctors. Not enough teachers.
proffexpert, Los Angeles
It is hard to have sympathy for those college graduates who voluntarily undertake huge debt in order to get an advanced degree in a profession where it is common knowledge that future financial success (and wherewithal to repay the debt incurred) is iffy, at best.
RF, Baltimore
The plight of lawyers shows the shape of things to come. Soon all professionals will be stripped of their elite status by automation, overseas outsourcing and special visas.
Paul Easton, Brooklyn
What about a Teach for America-type program for young lawyers, with debt forgiveness built in?
Law Feminist, Manhattan

