Jose Reyes put his head down as he left the on-deck circle, strode toward home plate and dug in his spikes in the batter’s box. As he did, many in the capacity crowd at MCU Park in Coney Island rose to their feet and welcomed him with a familiar chant.
“Jooooo-se, Jo-se, Jo-se, Jo-se,” they serenaded Reyes, just as they once had at Shea Stadium and Citi Field, putting a Mets-centric twist on the familiar “Olé” soccer chant.
The cheer, even if it did not ring throughout the entire stadium, washed over Reyes like a wave of relief.
Reyes, who signed a minor league contract with the Mets, returned a contrite and humbled figure on Sunday when he made his debut for the Class A Brooklyn Cyclones, a pit stop on his return to the Mets in the next week or so.
Suspended through May by Major League Baseball and then cut loose by the Colorado Rockies after he was arrested last year on charges — later dropped — of assaulting his wife, Reyes had not been sure what to expect, even in a forgiving cocoon not far from where he had reached his heights as a four-time All-Star shortstop.
“It was amazing,” Reyes said, speaking to about 25 members of the news media afterward. “I have to be honest with you guys: I was a little bit nervous there. I was a little bit emotional.”
Included in the overflow crowd of 7,851, about a third of whom had bought tickets since Reyes’s signing was announced, were Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson and Reyes’s wife, Katherine, and their three young girls.
Reyes was hitless in three at-bats against the Hudson Valley Renegades and played six innings at third base, the position he is most likely to play for the Mets. Alderson, who did not speak to reporters after the game, said earlier that Reyes would play for Brooklyn again on Monday and would then play either for Class AA Binghamton or Class AAA Las Vegas, trips that are complicated because both teams are on the road.
But those logistics seemed beside the point for Reyes.
He repeatedly referred to the domestic-violence episode, in which he was accused of grabbing his wife and shoving her into a sliding glass door at a hotel in Hawaii, as “a huge mistake.” He said he would continue counseling, which has been mandated by Major League Baseball, and he apologized to his wife, his family and his fans.
He also repeatedly expressed his gratitude to Jeff Wilpon, the Mets’ chief operating officer, and to Alderson, for taking him back.
“I’m going to do everything that I can to try to get better, not only as a person, but on the field,” Reyes said. “Like I said, whatever the team needs me to do, I’m going to be open to do it. I’m home. I’m happy.”
As fans lined up outside the ballpark on a sea-breezy, sun-kissed afternoon, there were a good number who dressed for the occasion with Reyes T-shirts or jerseys. Brian Barruch was wearing a T-shirt, with Reyes’s name and number (7) on the back, that his older brother had long ago outgrown. Kevin Hold, asked where his home white No. 7 Mets jersey had been, quipped, “In mothballs.”
Hold said that fans would welcome Reyes back as long as he showed contrition. He noted that the Yankees’ Alex Rodriguez and Milwaukee’s Ryan Braun were no longer the pariahs they had seemed to be after they served suspensions for using performance-enhancing drugs and that Mets fans had welcomed Lenny Dykstra at a recent reunion after his jail sentence.
“New York fans — yeah, we’ll give you a second chance,” Hold said. “But you know as well as I do: If you don’t produce, we’re going to boo you.”
Diane Haussermann, holding her young son’s hand as they stood in line, said she had mixed feelings about Reyes’s return because of the domestic-violence episode. “He’ll be under a microscope,” Haussermann said. “The fans will be forgiving, but they won’t forget.”
Phil Alessi, who had a Mets tattoo on his neck and wore an interlocking “N.Y.” earring in his right ear and a Mets script earring in his left ear, bought 10 tickets to the game. He was also holding onto hope that Reyes would light a spark under the Mets’ moribund offense.
“He’s paid his dues; he’s entitled to a second chance,” Alessi said. “The Mets play with no enthusiasm. We have no running game whatsoever. The first time he goes from first to third or first to home, he’s going to bring that spark back. I’m psyched.”
There were few signs on Sunday that that would happen.
Reyes struck out on a foul tip, cued a grounder to third base and reached in his final at-bat on a windblown pop-up. Reyes took his lead in familiar fashion, hands on his knees, edging away from the bag. But he stayed anchored there.
His day in the field was just as mundane. He caught two pop-ups and fielded a ground ball cleanly.
“The only thing I saw today was he’s too quick,” Cyclones Coach Edgardo Alfonzo, a former Mets third baseman, said after Reyes had taken ground balls during batting practice. “It’s called the hot corner — the ball is going to get to you faster. You just have to slow down.”
What Reyes did display was a familiar joie de vivre: He flipped a couple of baseballs into the stands at the end of an inning and pointed to left fielder Enmanuel Zabala and applauded him after a diving catch.
Reyes admitted that he had not been so happy when he was traded to Colorado last season and that it had affected his performance. His agent, Peter Greenberg, said he had tried in the past to get Reyes traded to the Mets.
Reyes said he would not steal 60 bases or hit 20 triples, numbers he once approached regularly — “Let’s not get too crazy,” he said — but that he was aware of doubters.
“It’s funny when I see people say, ‘Oh, he can’t play anymore,’ ” Reyes said, sounding as if he had plenty to offer — and to prove.

