WIMBLEDON, England — No matter what players say in front of a microphone, there is no shortage of schadenfreude in professional tennis.
In a sport where the big spoils do not trickle down far, one fewer competitor at the top means more trophies and goodies for those who remain.
But if you mention Juan Martín del Potro to most of the game’s leading men, their expressions do not lie. There is usually a slight wince, sometimes even a full shake of the head. There is genuine, unmistakable sympathy and the feeling that no champion — not even the one who once crushed all those groundstroke winners past them — deserves to have to deal with this.
In the men’s game, del Potro is the great lost talent of this bright and shiny tennis decade. He is the consistent and huge hitter from Tandil, Argentina, who could have made the Big Four into the Big Five or — who knows? — maybe even reshaped the Big One (in this Novak Djokovic moment) into the Big Two.
And so it was yet another bittersweet experience to watch del Potro back on court on Tuesday when he made his return to Wimbledon after a three-year absence and three operations on his left wrist.
“The gentle giant has been sorely missed,” said Patrick McEnroe, the former United States Davis Cup captain.
But this first-round match — his first in a Grand Slam tournament since January 2014 — turned out to be more sweet than sour in the end. Del Potro, still crushing forehands and serves, though no longer crushing backhands, took out Stéphane Robert of France, 6-1, 7-5, 6-0.
Now comes the giant and not-so-gentle step up: a match with the fourth-seeded Stan Wawrinka, who has matured into a two-time Grand Slam singles champion.
Del Potro beat the best of the moment to win his only Grand Slam title, defeating Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer back to back to win the 2009 United States Open at age 20. But the next year, del Potro required an operation on his right wrist, and he has needed three more on the left in the last 27 months, the most recent in June 2015.
“He had the game to take it to all the Big Four,” McEnroe said.
Del Potro took it to Djokovic in his last Wimbledon appearance, losing a five-set classic in the 2013 semifinals that was long on baseline acrobatics and mutual respect. And it would come as no surprise if he gave Wawrinka quite a scare.
A second-round duel between Grand Slam singles champions is rare in the age of 32 seeds and prize hoarding among a small ruling class, although there have been high-profile clashes at this early stage. Jimmy Connors lost to Ivan Lendl in the second round of the 1992 United States Open in what turned out to be the 40-year-old Connors’s last match.
“I couldn’t be more proud of Juan Martín,” said Dr. Richard Berger, del Potro’s surgeon at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.
Berger called del Potro “a poster child for an unbreakable faith in his recovery and a dogged determination to come back, including modifying his swing, one of the most difficult things for a champion to do.”
Del Potro, working at Wimbledon on a trial basis with Andy Murray’s former coach Dani Vallverdu, has been near his breaking point, nonetheless. He considered retirement at the end of last season, but he chose to keep fighting through the pain and the mental blocks.
“There is a lot of apprehension that the pain is going to come back, even if it’s not there,” Berger said Tuesday in a telephone interview. “It’s the fear that oh, if I mis-hit or I overhit, I’m going to end up with the same thing again. And bless his heart, Juan was faced with that.”
Now 27 years old in a period when hyper-fit players over 30 abound, del Potro still has time to make an impact and has already left a legacy, with the 18-year-old American Taylor Fritz citing him as a prime inspiration. But del Potro has much less time than he once did and, for now, one fewer major weapon.
He used to be a flat-hitting force of nature off both wings. But he has had to adjust his two-handed backhand and slice many more backhands with one hand.
“One of the things that he and I have talked about a lot was that there were some aspects of his swing that put a tremendous amount of pressure on his wrist,” Berger said. “And when he would prepare for a backhand, especially a topspin shot, he would dip his left upper extremity down and basically hyperextend his wrist to come up and actually make contact with the ball. And it was at that precise moment he had the pain, and for the longest time, it was a challenge, first of all, to figure out what was causing it. It took a couple of operations.”
After another round of immobilization, rehabilitation and then a gradual return to competition, it ended up taking a third operation, as well.
The consequence was there on the statistics sheet on Tuesday. Del Potro had 20 forehand winners and zero backhand winners.
That is an imbalance that men like Wawrinka — sympathy or no sympathy — will continue to exploit. Del Potro believes he simply needs more big-pressure matches and thinks he might not be back on the full attack until next season.
“I’m not having all my confidence on my backhands yet,” he said. “And that’s tough when you play against the top guys, because they are such good players and they are strong enough to play in the fifth-set matches. This is my comeback after three years. I’m expecting to be better in the future.”
Berger urges the younger generation to take precautions in a sport that is increasingly stressful on so many joints. Nadal, who is missing Wimbledon with a wrist injury, is the latest example.
“It’s so much more of a contact sport than people think it is,” Berger said. “The more we can do to cut down on the vibration is probably going to be helpful, but in reality, I think it’s so much about the demands of play with the extreme positions and the forces they are putting on the wrist. I don’t think equipment modifications or rule changes are going to do the trick, because obviously a lot of good tennis is being played with the equipment as it stands.
“But I think as far as the athletes are concerned, we are beginning to understand the importance of reflexive and proprioceptive training,” he added. “That’s an attempt to bring the muscles that cross the joint into more of a role of stabilizing the joint, not just moving it. So we don’t depend just on the ligaments.”
Berger recommends training with exercise balls that contain internal gyroscopes or with long, flexible, carbon-fiber blades that oscillate.
Del Potro travels with such tools, but there is no doubt that it would have been better for him if he had known way back when what he knows now.
Better for his sport, too.

