New York City's game of cones between Mister Softee and New York Ice Cream continued this week, as the battling of the two companies moved from the streets of Midtown to the federal courtroom in Lower Manhattan.
While New York Ice Cream drivers have been accused of intimidating their frozen-confection competition with threats and strong-arm tactics, the owner of the company, Dimitrios Tsirkos, owes hundreds of thousands of dollars to Mister Softee for breaching franchise agreements, trademark infringement and other unfair business practices.
On Thursday, Judge Laura Taylor Swain held Mr. Tsirkos in contempt of court for failing to begin payments on a $97,000 judgment handed down in 2014.
The judge dismissed claims from Mr. Tsirkos's lawyer that the ice cream operator was an “unsophisticated” businessman who did not realize that he owed the money. “It beggars belief,” she said, that Mr. Tsirkos was ignorant to the charges.
Frank A. Reino, a lawyer for Mister Softee, asked the judge to also hold Mr. Tsirkos in contempt of court for the other fines they claim he owes. “He's buried his head in the sand,” said Mr. Reino.
The defendant was absent from court. His lawyer, Peter Moulinos, declined to comment.
Mr. Tsirkos had been a franchise owner of Mister Softee trucks for decades. He defected in 2014, when, according to court papers, he stopped paying franchise fees. Then he removed several of his trucks from the depot and altered the trademarked “Cone head” figure, a smiling, tuxedoed wafer cone, to a smiling, tuxedoed waffle cone with sprinkles, under the name Master Softee. (The fleet has since been painted all-white and renamed New York Ice Cream.)
Mister Softee sued. Now, all told, Mr. Tsirkos owes Mister Softee $767,000, almost half of which is for mounting legal fees. So far, Mister Softee's lawyers said they had been able to seize only $2,426.
For years, Mister Softee has been pursuing Mr. Tsirkos, but his legal representation has been in flux. A previous lawyer failed to show up in court, which is why Mr. Tsirkos claims not to have known about the order to begin payments. Multiple letters had been sent to his home and truck depot. His wife testified that she had given the letters to her husband. (She, too, is being sued by Mister Softee, which has accused her of hiding money for her husband. Judge Swain described the tactic of shifting money between accounts as “playing Whac-a-Mole.”)
In May, Judge Swain ordered him to start paying $6,000 a month, which he has yet to do. On Thursday, the judge gave him until Monday to pay $12,000 for the delinquent payments.
“When I sign an order, it is not a suggestion,” she told the court.
If Mr. Tsirkos fails to make good on the judge's order by Monday, he could face further sanctions from the court, or arrest.
Jeffrey Zucker, who has been representing Mister Softee since 1998, said Mr. Tsirkos was running out of places to hide. Bankruptcy is an option, “but he has too many assets,” Mr. Zucker said.
According to Mr. Zucker, Mr. Tsirkos also receives income from rental apartments and 30 or so ice cream trucks.
“He's not some little guy that's scraping by,” said Mr. Zucker. “He lives a nice life.”
Mister Softee has no plans to back down. “Like I told his lawyer,” said Mr. Zucker, “We're not going away.”

