The leader of a polygamous breakaway sect of the Mormon Church has gone on the run less than two weeks after he was released from jail and confined to a home in Salt Lake City pending a trial on fraud and money laundering charges, officials said.
Lyle Jeffs, 56, the de facto leader of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was discovered to be missing on Sunday, said Sandra Yi Barker, an F.B.I. spokeswoman in Salt Lake City.
Ms. Barker said that the F.B.I. had received several tips since Mr. Jeffs’s disappearance and that he was possibly seeking shelter in communities of the sect outside Utah, including those in Canada or Mexico. She warned that he was considered “armed and dangerous.”
Mr. Jeffs was ordered to wear a GPS device and stay at a Salt Lake City home after he was released from jail on June 9 by Judge Ted Stewart of the United States District Court of Utah. Ms. Barker declined to comment on how Mr. Jeffs may have escaped.
Mr. Jeffs is the brother of Warren Jeffs, the self-styled prophet of the sect who is serving a life sentence for the sexual assault of underage girls whom he took as his brides. Lyle Jeffs has been running the church, including its day-to-day financial affairs, in his brother’s absence, prosecutors said.
Mr. Jeffs and 10 other leaders and members of the renegade sect, which embraces practices renounced by the official Mormon Church, were indicted in February on felony counts involving money laundering and a scheme to divert millions of dollars in food-stamp transactions.
All of the defendants pleaded not guilty. The trial is scheduled to begin in October.
Prosecutors accused the defendants of compelling church members to turn over their food-stamp benefits to a communal storehouse, which church leaders used to distribute goods to their followers.
Sect members, however, did not receive any eligible food products in return, prosecutors said. The benefits, the indictment said, were used by ineligible beneficiaries and for unapproved purchases, among them a tractor, a pickup truck and almost $17,000 worth of paper products.
Mr. Jeffs and the other defendants made participation in the scheme something akin to a religious commandment, prosecutors said. They told church members that surrendering their possessions — and in turn obtaining all their food and household goods from the storehouse — was required to participate in the “United Order,” a religious practice they instituted in 2011.
A lawyer for Lyle Jeffs, Kathryn Nester, argued in May that delays to the start of his trial imposed an unreasonably long period of pretrial detention. She said he did not pose a flight risk in part because all of his co-defendants had been released and none had fled.
Two days before Mr. Jeffs disappeared, Ms. Nester submitted a petition to the court seeking fewer restrictions on his pretrial release, including permission for him to work and to receive family visitors. Ms. Nester said on Tuesday that she had not heard from Mr. Jeffs since his disappearance.

