Making a grand, glorious mess is one of childhood's greatest joys. Cleaning it up is often one of parenthood's worst headaches.
But every generation should enjoy the chaos in Brooklyn on Saturday, when the first SeriousFun Messtival will unfold in Prospect Park, and all the resulting goo, gunk and grit will combine with nature's own.
Years of summer camp rituals, like eating spaghetti without using forks (or hands), “made us think that making a mess was a lot of fun,” said Mary Beth Powers, chief executive of SeriousFun Children's Network, which will sponsor the event.
“And,” she added, “it was even more fun for parents when it wasn't taking place in their home.”
The celebration will help families whose lives have turned messy, too. Founded by the actor Paul Newman in 1988, the network operates some 30 free camps and related programs worldwide for young people with serious illnesses. “We serve children with over 50 different conditions” and diseases, Ms. Powers said. “Cancer, hemophilia, H.I.V., kids who just had a transplant.”
The messtival, which will include live music, dancing and a 100-foot zip line, will benefit the camps while introducing other children to those programs' most inspired activities. Young attendees can paint their faces and color their hair with chalk before embarking on the SeriousFun Run, in which they'll maneuver through obstacles like painted tires and practice gaits like the crab walk shuffle. Runners will also pass through a bubble wash — a foamy storm — and be drenched by water blasters.
Those who prefer creative messes can become part of the human tie dye machine, in which they'll decorate T-shirts and headbands with squirts of vibrant color, or take up paint archery, which involves shooting pigment-soaked, foam-tipped arrows at paper targets. “It's sort of Jackson Pollock-esque,” Ms. Powers explained.
Visitors can mix their own bug juice at the appropriately named mess hall, as well as make s'mores. (The messtival encourages hands-free eating.) Dessert lovers may also enjoy the Pie Face! tournament, a game that resembles Russian roulette with whipped-cream ammunition.
The biggest lure, however, may be the dunk tank, a chance for children to hit a target and send the adult of their choice plummeting into barbecue sauce.
But while the tank may offer some tangy revenge, most of the fun has a sweeter side, Ms. Powers said: “an opportunity for kids to get involved on behalf of other kids.”
(Saturday from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., Breeze Hill, accessible from the Prospect Park entrance at Ocean Avenue and East Lake Drive; seriousfunmesstival.com.)

