In the last part of ESPN’s “O. J.: Made in America,” the prosecutor Marcia Clark remembers seeing the jubilation and grief across the country after the not-guilty verdict in the O. J. Simpson trial: “It was all so much bigger than we were. So much bigger.”
You could take that quote more than one way. Ms. Clark has been second-guessed for years for losing the case when it seemed so obvious to so many that Mr. Simpson had killed Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman. Maybe it’s natural for her to want to believe that she was defeated by intractable social and racial divides, not by Johnnie Cochran.
But she’s also stating the documentary’s theme. The story of Mr. Simpson, “Made in America” argues, was the story of his country. It was bigger than Ms. Clark, bigger than the Dream Team, bigger than Mr. Simpson himself.
It was big enough, in fact, to fill two of the most astonishing television series of the year.
When “Made in America” was scheduled scant months away from FX’s “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” it sounded like overkill. Instead, the pairing established the Simpson story as the kind of historical episode that only reveals more when viewed from additional angles.
The two series embody two ways of seeing history, personal versus social, micro versus macro. In one version, these events happened because these people with these characteristics made these choices. In the other, greater forces spanning millions of people and hundreds of years lead to a particular moment.
Television drama favors the first approach. People like stories about people. With a few exceptions — “The Wire,” notably — TV drama resists the idea that characters’ outcomes are fated, as in Greek tragedy, by larger powers. It wants its protagonists to steer the ship, not to be carried by the current.
So “The People v. O. J.” gives us a version of the trial that is not bigger than Ms. Clark et al., but precisely life-size. And it does so brilliantly. It shows Mr. Cochran (Courtney B. Vance) as crusader and manipulator, Ms. Clark (Sarah Paulson) as overmatched single mother beaten up by the tabloids, Robert Kardashian (David Schwimmer) eaten up by conflict and doubt.
Its trial is a drama of people, won and lost by their ingenuity, vanity and hubris. It pulls up close, sits you down at the conference tables and inside the Bronco, lets you measure the characters’ frailties and feel their sweat.
In “Made in America,” on the other hand, the director Ezra Edelman pulls back, way back, like a news chopper over a freeway chase. Before you hear about the trial, the documentary says, you need to hear all the stories — the stories of race, celebrity, sports, America — that it’s a part of.
“People v. O. J.” begins at a sprint, showing a clip of the Rodney King beating, introducing Mr. Simpson as a celebrity murder defendant in a racially polarized city and adding context on the fly.
“Made in America” takes a long breath and says: O.K., first, here’s what O. J. meant.
Here was what it meant for white America, after the turmoil of the ’60s, to embrace a charming black athlete, not just as an athlete but a celebrity, an actor, the face of major corporations. (This was the period of attempted racial détente in pop culture that brought forth the original “Roots” mini-series — in which Mr. Simpson had a bit part.)
And, it adds: Here’s how hard that was. Here’s how radical those innocuous-looking Hertz commercials were. A strong black man, running through an airport. Would white viewers be scared? Would he look like speed personified — or like a criminal?
And here’s how you fixed that problem, in America in 1975, by making sure every other delighted face we saw, cheering, “Go, O. J., go!,” was white; they “endorsed” the endorser. (It worked. Part of the dissonance, when news of the murders broke in 1994, was the contrast with the innocuous O. J. from TV.)
Ready for the trial? Not yet. The second episode doubles back and says: O.K., now here’s what being black in Los Angeles meant.
Let’s go back, it says, way back, to the migration of African-Americans from the South, who saw L.A. as their best chance for a life free of discrimination. And then forward to the Watts riots in 1965. Here’s what the L.A.P.D., its abuses and its fraught racial history, meant if you were black in that city. Here are the promises made and broken. Here’s the history that O. J. and America finally could not get past, that jurors carried into sequestration.
Now, it says, you’re ready to hear about the trial.
One of these ways of telling the story — personal history versus social history — is not superior to the other. Nor are the lines between the two series absolute. The dishy storytelling in “People v. O. J.” makes the social context dramatic, capturing the intraracial dynamics between Mr. Cochran and Christopher Darden, for instance, or showing us how loaded the phrase “Simi Valley” is in a Downtown L.A. courtroom.
And there’s plenty of personal insight in “Made in America.” It fleshes out Mr. Simpson, whom Cuba Gooding Jr. plays as a volatile question mark in the mini-series. Here, he’s complex, self-serving, self-deceiving and occasionally self-aware.
Late in the documentary, he gives a speech to a black audience after his trial, about his relationship to that community: “What I’ve done is something that’s happened with a lot of black men in America,” he says. “You find yourself protecting your place in society. You tend to think that you’re immune to something.”
It may be a true insight or it may be calculated; it’s never certain if the real O. J. is ever less a performance than Mr. Gooding’s. This is just one way the two series bring out depths in each other.
Here’s one more. In the FX series, after the acquittal, an African-American juror flashes Mr. Simpson a black-power fist salute. It’s a small moment, but visceral. “Made in America” unpacks it: The juror, it turns out, had been a Black Panther. Then Mr. Edelman cuts to a still of African-American athletes, at the 1968 Olympics, giving the same salute. Everything the hours of the film had set up — the history of race, sport, America — crashes together in that image.
Just so, the two programs wind up standing together, not as competitors but as collaborators. In the end, two O. J. series weren’t too much at all. They were barely enough.

