Kansas lawmakers passed an education funding bill on Friday night in a move they hope will stop the State Supreme Court from carrying out its threat to close public schools by next week.
On the second day of a special session, lawmakers rushed to come up with $38 million to meet the court's order to fix inequities that it considered harmful to poorer school districts. In May, the court said that the Legislature's current funding formula “creates intolerable, and simply unfair, wealth-based disparities among the districts,” and gave the Legislature until June 30 to find a solution.
Many in Kansas had feared a constitutional showdown between the Republican-controlled Legislature and the left-leaning State Supreme Court. But the House voted 116 to 6 in favor of the bill and the Senate approved it 38 to 1. Gov. Sam Brownback has indicated that he will sign the bill without delay.
If the court does not accept the Legislature's solution, it could close schools statewide by July.
Alan Rupe, a lawyer representing four school districts that sued the state over funding, said that the vote was a victory for his plaintiffs. “This amended legislation represents a compromise which will satisfy the court and allow schools to open,” he said in an email statement.
In Topeka, Kan., this week, lawmakers said they were determined to keep public schools open despite Kansas' dire financial situation and a sparse state budget. Many Republicans and Democrats in the state have criticized Mr. Brownback's large tax cuts in 2012 and 2013, and accused the governor of leading the state into the budget crisis.
Four former Kansas governors — Kathleen Sebelius, Bill Graves, Mike Hayden and John Carlin — said on Friday that they had sent a letter to Kansans asking for support for a new bipartisan political group and denouncing Mr. Brownback's policies.
“Being a Kansas conservative used to mean paying off debt, balancing the budget and not running up bills our grandchildren would be expected to pay,” Mr. Hayden said in a statement. “I'm eager to see Kansas restored to those principles and the upcoming election is our first opportunity.”
Mr. Brownback cannot run for governor again because of term limits, but all senators and representatives in the Legislature are up for re-election in November.
Representative Ron Ryckman Jr., a Republican, presented a plan on Thursday that would take a 0.5 percent budget cut from all schools, producing $13 million in savings. Poorer district would then receive additional money.
On Friday, the bill was revised to remove the cut from schools' operating budgets. A new plan took millions from other sources, including from the state's motor vehicle fees and the state's revenues from a national settlement with tobacco companies.
After a full day of negotiations, lawmakers expressed relief that they came up with a funding solution that they believe will pass the State Supreme Court. Under the plan, the districts that would get additional funding include Wichita, the state's largest, which would gain $10.2 million, and Kansas City, a high-poverty district, which would gain $2.6 million.

