A new digital ad campaign from Priorities USA, a “super PAC” supporting Hillary Clinton, equates fighting bigotry with stopping the presidential candidacy of Donald J. Trump. Priorities is spending $500,000 — a large amount for an online ad — on the first commercial, “Dante,” which portrays Mr. Trump as biased against the disabled.
THE AD Flashing “cancer survivor” tattoos on his forearms, Dante Latchman, 17, tells of surviving a rare spinal-cord affliction that was diagnosed when he was 1. “I’ve spent my whole life fighting back,” he says. He is shown watching television and seeing Mr. Trump mock a reporter (Serge Kovaleski of The New York Times) who has a condition that limits the functioning of his joints. “I don’t want a president who makes fun of me, I want a president who inspires me,” Dante says. “That’s not Donald Trump.”
The ad drives home its theme — a “Stop Hate” graphic flips to say “Stop Trump” — as Dante is seen walking down the sidewalk with his mother, his gait noticeably laborious.
THE IMPACT This is the second ad produced by Priorities USA attacking Mr. Trump on this subject, and Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has also seized on Mr. Trump’s mockery of Mr. Kovaleski. What makes this one distinctive and compelling is the ad’s youthful, telegenic protagonist and narrator, who appears to embody both the difficulties that many people with disabilities must confront in their daily lives and the pain that hurtful words can cause. Less a classic attack ad than a scolding one, it takes on added power because of the sympathy that he engenders, much of it wordlessly.
Changing channels ...
Mr. Trump’s cash-poor campaign has not run television ads since last month, but a super PAC supporting him, Restoring America Now, has placed an ad that tries to undermine Mrs. Clinton’s credibility as a champion for women by accusing her of smearing her husband’s accusers in his sexual scandals during the 1990s. Yet so far the ad is running only on cable systems nationally — because the super PAC, too, is short of funds.
Republican strategists have been fretting that Mr. Trump could drag down their candidates in other contests, and Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, whose seat is one of the Senate’s most endangered, appears so worried that he has begun running a new ad showcasing his opposition to Mr. Trump. A viewer could almost be forgiven for mistaking Mr. Kirk for a Democrat: The ad highlights his support for abortion rights and for holding a hearing on President Obama’s nominee to the Supreme Court, Judge Merrick B. Garland. Then, to demonstrate Mr. Kirk’s courage, it shows newspaper headlines (“Kirk Dumps Trump”) and boasts that he “bucked his party to say Donald Trump is not fit to be commander in chief.”
In her primary campaign, Mrs. Clinton’s Spanish-language ads were almost uniformly positive. But in her first Spanish-language ad of the general election — released after the Supreme Court deadlocked on an immigration case, effectively ending Mr. Obama’s effort to let millions of unauthorized immigrants live in the country legally — Mrs. Clinton wastes no time rebuking Mr. Trump. Highlighting his promise to assemble a “deportation force” to round up and eject the 11 million people now in the country illegally, the ad features Spanish-speakers recalling the earliest immigrants in their own families, including veterans of World War II and more recent arrivals in Miami. “Soy Hillary Clinton, and I approve this message,” the candidate says at the end of the ad, which is to begin running during Sunday’s Argentina-Chile final of the Copa América soccer tournament.
$112 MILLION: Amount spent or reserved for television ads by Priorities USA since May 17, according to Kantar Media/CMAG.
$2 MILLION: Amount spent or reserved by the two Trump-aligned super PACs, Great America and Rebuilding America Now.

