ROME — Christo built it and people came, in droves.
In fact, so many visitors have traveled to tiny Lake Iseo in Northern Italy to experience the conceptual artist's latest work, “The Floating Piers,” that officials have decided to close the installation from midnight to 6 a.m. so that workers can clean and repair the saffron-colored fabric enveloping the walkway, which has seen unexpectedly considerable wear and tear.
Since the installation, which is free to the public, opened last Saturday, more than 350,000 people have converged on the lake; organizers had planned for 40,000 to 45,000 per day.
“Yesterday, we registered 97,000 visitors, more than twice than what we had calibrated reception for,” Valerio Valenti, the prefect of nearby Brescia, who leads the committee responsible for the project's security and assisting visitors, said Thursday.
Arrivals have been increasing daily, lured by the conceit of walking on water — a long-envisioned dream of Christo and Jeanne-Claude, his collaborator and wife who died in 2009 — and by the installation's impermanence: It closes on July 3.
Despite the crowds, Mr. Valenti said that the only health or safety issue involved a pregnant woman whose water broke while walking on the nearly two-mile-long walkway that connects two islands in the lake to each other and to the mainland. She was whisked by water ambulance to a hospital where she gave birth, he said.
But the fact remains, Mr. Valenti added, “we're managing a mass of people which is incompatible with the site.”
The influx of visitors has strained the infrastructure and transportation system around Lake Iseo, perhaps the least well known of Northern Italy's lakes. On Wednesday, officials delayed several trains traveling there from Brescia, the nearest large town, stranding hundreds of travelers. Mr. Valenti said the measure was necessary to curtail arrivals to the piers.
“If the walkway is already saturated, it makes no sense to continue to allow hundreds more to arrive, and trains are the easiest to stop,” he said. Visitors have also been arriving by boat and by bus.
The overnight pause will also allow the lake towns of Sulzano and Monte Isola to deal with the piles of garbage left behind by the crowds.
“We can't show the world a face that isn't ours, a territory that isn't welcoming, so it was necessary to take measures,” Fiorello Turla, the mayor of Monte Isola, said of the decision to stem access to the piers, which will begin Thursday evening with the last access at 10 p.m., so that all visitors can exit by midnight. The main problem his town faced, he said, was removing garbage and cleaning the portable toilets, issues that could be more practically resolved overnight.
Transportation schedules were also reshuffled Thursday to help improve mobility, officials said in a statement.
“The area couldn't appear dirty against the backdrop of this work of art,” Mr. Turla added, describing the unexpected influx as a “pacific invasion” that despite the heat and long lineups had been dealt with good grace on the part of visitors. Should the situation stabilize, he said, the piers would be reopened as before.
The root of the problem, Mr. Valenti said, is that visitors have been savoring their stay on the piers.
“It's the nature of the work,” he said, noting that visitors often came in the morning and left at night, with intervals of picnicking, playing and sunbathing in between. “It's a work that lends itself to be experienced over time. It's free and people want to enjoy it, but it's stopping others from doing the same.”

