BUFFALO — Matthew Tkachuk stepped off the ice at HarborCenter, where he and other top N.H.L. prospects were conducting a skills clinic for squirt-age players, and recalled his own youth hockey days.
While growing up in St. Louis, hockey was a family business for Tkachuk. His father, Keith, played left wing for the Blues during the second half of an 18-year N.H.L. career, and some of his youngest teammates boarded at the Tkachuk house. Matthew Tkachuk remembered sessions of mini sticks and video games with Lee Stempniak, David Backes and Philip McRae.
He also recalled skating at practice with Erik Johnson, a defenseman drafted No. 1 over all by St. Louis in 2006. “I thought that was the coolest thing ever,” he said.
On the eve of Friday’s draft at First Niagara Center, Tkachuk, a 6-foot-1, 200-pound power forward, said that the most lasting impression of those days was observing the comportment of successful pros.
“It was all about their habits and all about how they worked,” he said, “and all about how they took care of themselves in the weight room, with stretching, recovery, rehab. You know how talented they are on the ice, but seeing what they do away from it, that’s what is really the difference between guys that make it and guys that are very close and very skilled that don’t make it.”
Tkachuk now has the chance to make it after being selected by the Calgary Flames with the No. 6 pick. He was the first among several sons of former N.H.L. players who were drafted in the first round. The others included Alexander Nylander (No. 8, Buffalo Sabres); Logan Brown (No. 11, Ottawa Senators); Jakob Chychrun (No. 16, Arizona Coyotes); Kieffer Bellows (No. 19, Islanders); Max Jones (No. 24, Anaheim Ducks); and Tage Thompson (No. 26, Blues).
With the No. 1 overall pick, the Toronto Maple Leafs selected Auston Matthews, a 6-foot-2, 210-pound center from Scottsdale, Ariz., who played for the Zurich Lions of the Swiss League last season. Matthews is the first American-born player to be selected first over all since the Chicago Blackhawks drafted Patrick Kane in 2007.
“The last three-plus years, there’s been a lot of long-term N.H.L. players’ sons coming up in the draft scene,” said Dan Marr, the director of N.H.L. Central Scouting. “Some of them are standouts, some are solid prospects. I think the advantage of these kids is that they grew up around the game, so they’ve seen the discipline you have to have as far as eating, sleeping, training.’’
Cliff Ronning was a 5-foot-8 shifty center who played 17 seasons in the N.H.L., setting an example for his son Ty, a 5-9 forward for the Vancouver Giants of the Western Hockey League last season. Ty vividly remembered being awakened in the middle of the night by banging below his bedroom.
“I would come downstairs and my dad was there in the gym, full sweat, flexing in the mirror,” he said. “He was working his butt off early, and he had a game the next day.”
Ronning noted the discipline his father had imposed on his own life and tried to emulate it. “My dad didn’t drink till he was 37 years old,” he said.
Jeff Chychrun’s eight-year N.H.L. career as a punishing defenseman was over by the time his son, Jakob, was born in 1998 in Boca Raton, Fla. Still, the elder Chychrun coached Jakob’s youth hockey teams for the Florida Junior Panthers and gave him a glimpse into the N.H.L. life.
The Chychruns had season tickets for the Panthers, and through his connections, Jeff introduced Jakob to some of his hockey idols after games.
“I was the biggest Sidney Crosby fan growing up, and I met him a few times at a young age,” said Jakob, a 6-2, 220-pound defenseman for the Sarnia Sting of the Ontario Hockey League. “That was really cool for me, looking up to guys like that and being able to meet them, and ultimately to be where they are one day. It made me work that much harder.”
Some N.H.L. fathers maintained a more active role in their sons’ hockey development. Alexander Nylander is the son of Michael Nylander, who played 15 seasons. Alexander’s brother William was a first-round pick of the Maple Leafs in 2014. Last season, Alexander Nylander was a high-scoring wing for the Mississauga Steelheads of the O.H.L. His father was an assistant.
“Because he was my assistant coach, he was always on the bench, always seeing me, my habits and stuff like that,” Nylander said. “It was good, since he was hard on everybody to give 100 percent in practice, which we all did. And to prepare for the playoffs, since he’s been through it before.”
Brian Bellows scored 1,022 points during a 17-year career and won a Stanley Cup with the Montreal Canadiens in 1993. His son Kieffer is a sharpshooting left wing who has committed to play for Boston University next season. Kieffer Bellows was sensitive to suggestions that his family name had advanced his hockey career.
“It’s always been my skill set and hard work that’s opened the doors to the N.H.L. draft for me,” he said.
If anything, Bellows said, there can be pressure associated with living up to a famous father’s hockey legacy. “You see Matthew Tkachuk, he’s got a lot of pressure with his dad being such a great player,” he said.
Keith Tkachuk, who scored 538 career goals, the third most by an American, comes from a hockey family tree. He is a cousin of the Hayes brothers, Kevin, a forward for the Rangers, and Jimmy, a right wing for the Boston Bruins. Another cousin is Tom Fitzgerald, a right wing who played in more than 1,000 N.H.L. games and is now an assistant general manager for the Devils. Fitzgerald’s son Ryan was a fourth-round pick of the Bruins in 2013. Another son, Casey, a defenseman for Boston College, is eligible for the draft.

