A former suburban Dallas police officer who resigned after video showed him forcing a bikini-clad black 15-year-old girl to the ground will not be charged in the matter, the police said on Thursday. A Collin County grand jury decided not to indict the former McKinney officer, Eric Casebolt, who pushed the girl to the ground after a June 2015 party at a pool that drew a crowd of predominantly black teenagers. The episode drew protests from civil rights groups. It was not clear just what charge the jury was considering. Police commanders plan to hold a community meeting on Monday to discuss the investigation with residents. Cellphone videos showed Mr. Casebolt, who is white, running after black teenagers and ordering them to the ground, then forcing the girl onto her stomach and placing his knees on her back. He drew his firearm after two young men charged forward in apparent protest, but holstered the weapon when two other officers intervened. (AP)
A former civilian Defense Department officer who oversaw military contracts pleaded guilty to bribery on Thursday in connection with a Navy corruption case involving a Malaysian businessman who prosecutors say bilked the military out of more than $34 million. Paul Simpkins entered his plea in federal court in San Diego. Prosecutors said he accepted hundreds of thousands of dollars in exchange for helping Singapore-based businessman Leonard Francis. Mr. Simpkins is among more than a dozen people charged in the scandal centered on Mr. Francis, who pleaded guilty to bribery charges and is awaiting sentencing. (AP)
Filtered tap water is safe for everyone in Flint, the federal government said Thursday, lifting a recommendation that pregnant women, nursing mothers and children under 6 drink only bottled water to avoid lead exposure. The announcement was based on tests of filters that had been distributed for months for free by the State of Michigan. The Environmental Protection Agency said the filters remove or reduce lead to well below the action level of 15 parts per billion, although no lead is considered safe. Some samples from high-risk areas in Flint have been coming back at less than 1 part per billion. Flint used the Flint River for 18 months, but lead leached from old pipes at homes because the water was not treated to control corrosion. Although the city switched water sources last fall, there still is lead in the system. “It is encouraging news,” said Mayor Karen Weaver, who said she still wanted all lead-tainted plumbing replaced. (AP)

