With one of the few payrolls in baseball exceeding $200 million, patience is nearly a vice to the Yankees.
On Saturday, however, it was the central virtue in their 2-1 win over the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium, where Michael Pineda had one of his best starts of the season, giving up only two hits in six innings, striking out eight.
In the second inning, Pineda allowed a home run to Brian Dozier. But instead of aiming for their own quick strike, the Yankees pieced together 10 hits — all singles — to overtake the Twins in the eighth inning and set up Aroldis Chapman for his 15th save.
Chapman combined with Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller to throw three scoreless innings for the third straight game.
Over that span, they have allowed one hit and one ball out of the infield. The Yankees now have the dominant bullpen they were expecting once Chapman joined the team after having served a 30-game suspension under Major League Baseball’s domestic violence policy.
“We have so much confidence in all those three guys out there,” said right fielder Carlos Beltran, who drove in the Yankees’ first run in the fifth inning. “It’s crazy. Every time they come, we expect them to be perfect.”
The Yankees waited longer than expected for Pineda to round into form, but Manager Joe Girardi said he had seen marked improvement in Pineda’s last five starts, during which his E.R.A. dropped from 6.92 to 5.51.
The lone hiccup during that stretch came at Minnesota on June 18, when Pineda allowed four runs, three earned, in five and a third innings.
But on Saturday, Pineda mixed in a changeup, which threw the Twins off balance and led to a more effective fastball and slider.
“The key for him, when he puts that slider in the dirt, he gets a lot of punchouts,” catcher Brian McCann said. “When he’s getting on top of it and he’s getting those swings, the hitter becomes passive and everything else plays up.”
Pineda patiently finding his way could serve as a model for Mark Teixeira, who returned from the disabled list after tearing cartilage in his right knee this month.
“He’s one of the best defenders at first base,” Beltran said of Teixeira, “and hopefully, he’s capable of getting into the rhythm and getting the timing.”
Before the game, Girardi was asked how often he might hold his breath when Teixeira is on the field, given the neck and knee injuries he has sustained this season.
“More than I would like,” Girardi said. “At any point, you worry that they could come back. We’ll just have to watch him carefully.”
Teixeira reached base twice, on an error and a walk, but could not convert in a crucial spot in the eighth inning.
With runners on the corners and no outs, Teixeira struck out in a 10-pitch at-bat. On the next pitch from Twins reliever Ryan Pressly, Starlin Castro drove in pinch-runner Aaron Hicks for the deciding run on a fielder’s choice and an error by Twins shortstop Eduardo Escobar, who booted the ground ball for his second error of the game.
Girardi will take a moderate approach with Teixeira, and said he did not envision immediately playing him four or five consecutive days, which increases the need for a capable backup. Although Ike Davis has played almost 600 games at first base, the Yankees designated him for assignment and kept Rob Refsnyder, who has nine hits in his last 23 at-bats, with the club.
Girardi also cited Refsnyder’s ability to play multiple positions as a factor.
“We really liked what Ref has done and he provides flexibility,” Girardi said. “He can play right field and second base, and his at-bats have been really good. He’s played well, so we’re going to stick with him.”
The Yankees would surely like to see Teixeira revert to his slugging form, alleviating the need to play Refsnyder often at first base. After Saturday’s game, Teixeira was hitting .176 with three home runs, the last on April 13. Since driving in his 10th run of the year on April 26, he has had two R.B.I.
Teixeira said he hoped to be more productive. He might receive additional cortisone injections during the All-Star break to prevent his knee from locking up.
One beneficial result of Teixeira’s time on the disabled list, he said, was that the rest had calmed the repeated neck spasms that he had experienced earlier in the year.
“It’s been a tough couple of first months, not playing as many games as I’d like and not being as healthy as I’d like,” Teixeira said, “but hopefully, like I said, the second half is going to be different.”

