Nearly 40 percent of American workers hold a bachelor’s degree. College graduates are found in virtually every profession: 15 percent of mail carriers have a four-year degree, as do one in five clerical and sales workers and 83,000 bartenders.
Getting a bachelor’s degree is what going to college means to most Americans and is so ingrained in our culture that students who do not march along are often admonished, questioned and considered — or consider themselves — failures.
Yet the decades-long march to college-for-everyone-at-18 has actually closed off options for teenagers and 20-somethings, rather than opened up opportunities.
As recently as the 1970s, a teenager had a number of options after graduating from high school: get a good-paying job right away, enlist in the military, find an apprenticeship in a trade or go to college.
Today, a teenager really has only two of those options: the military or college. Less than 1 percent of Americans serve in the military, so most go to college right after high school. Yet only 52 percent of young people have either a two- or four-year degree or an industry certificate by the time they reach their mid-20s.
As I traveled the country the last two years talking to employers of all sizes and in all sectors of the economy for my new book, “There Is Life After College,” what I heard most is the worry they have about filling so-called middle-skill positions in advanced manufacturing, health care and information technology.
Nearly half of the American work force has these jobs today, but many of them are baby boomers who will soon be retiring. It’s expected that as many as 25 million of all new job openings in the next decade will be for middle-skills jobs.
What we need are job-training institutions on par with academic institutions as prestigious and rigorous as the Ivy League to attract students interested in pursuing skilled jobs critical for the economy that don’t necessarily require a four-year college degree.
The modern version of what an apprenticeship could look like for American students interested in alternatives to college is on display at The Apprentice School in Newport News, Va., where students choose from one of more than 20 occupational areas and are guaranteed a job with the military contractor that operates Newport News Shipbuilding.
The school is just as selective as Harvard. It receives more than 4,000 applications each year for 230 spots, and significant numbers of its graduates go on to earn bachelor’s or master’s degrees.
We need more such schools and pathways post-high school that serve a greater array of industries as well as students who don’t want to travel the one route we offer them now.

