INTERNATIONAL
An article on May 29 about the conviction and sentencing of former military officers for their roles in Operation Condor, in which South American military governments hunted down and eliminated leftist dissidents across national borders, misstated, in some editions, the number of officers convicted for their roles in killing, kidnapping and torturing more than 100 victims as part of the operation. Fourteen were convicted, not 15. (One other defendant was convicted on separate charges involving a different set of victims.) Because of an editing error, the article misstated, in some editions, the nationality of one defendant. He is from Uruguay, not Argentina. The article also misstated the decade during which Argentina passed amnesty laws, whose loopholes prosecutors exploited to proceed with the Operation Condor cases. It was the 1980s, not the 1990s. And also because of an editing error, an accompanying picture caption misidentified, in some editions, the site where victims and their relatives watched the sentencing. They were shown at the Argentine Embassy in Montevideo, Uruguay, watching a live feed — not at the sentencing itself, which was in a Buenos Aires courtroom.
BUSINESS DAY
An Upshot article on Tuesday about the effect Britain's decision to leave the European Union could have on the global economy referred incorrectly to the dollar's performance against the yen between Thursday and Monday. It dropped against the yen; it did not rise.
SPORTS
The Sports of The Times column on Tuesday, about the American gymnast Simone Biles, referred incorrectly to the coming Rio Games in some copies. They are in August, not “next month.”
•
An article in some editions on Tuesday about the Mets' 11-4 loss to the Washington Nationals referred incorrectly to Mets pitcher Noah Syndergaard's walks in recent starts. His total of three walks on Monday equaled his total from his previous seven starts combined; it did not exceed it.
•
The On Swimming column on Saturday, about the transformation of the United States Olympic swimming trials from a small qualifying event into a spectacle, referred incorrectly to the 2012 Olympic relay for which Conor Dwyer qualified. It was the 4x200, or 800-meter, freestyle relay — not the 4x800 relay. (There is no such relay.)
OBITUARIES
An obituary on Tuesday about the track coach Sam Bell misspelled the surname of one of his daughters. She is Beth Ahearn, not Ahern.
•
An obituary on Saturday about the keyboardist Bernie Worrell misspelled the name of his 2007 solo album. It is “Improvisczario,” not “Improviscario.”
FOOD
A brief report in the Front Burner column last Wednesday about a 100 percent rye whisky from Canadian Club misstated the whisky's proof. It is 80, not 40.
The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

