A gourmet moonshine maker in Kentucky may have won a public relations battle with the state’s biggest university. But on Thursday, he lost his legal war.
Colin Fultz, the owner of Kentucky Mist Moonshine — an upscale distillery that sells fruit-infused moonshine in the central Appalachian town of Whitesburg, Ky. — has spent the past eight months embroiled in a trademark dispute with the University of Kentucky over who owns the rights to the name “Kentucky.”
The university — whose Wildcats basketball team brings in millions of dollars in revenue each year — says it does; in 1997, it trademarked the word “Kentucky” for use on clothing. When Mr. Fultz opened shop last October in his home city, Whitesburg, and tried to trademark his business name, the university tried to block him from doing so for apparel. Officials said they mostly hoped to open negotiations with Mr. Fultz to keep him from marketing “Kentucky Mist Moonshine” T-shirts in the school’s signature colors of royal blue and white.
Instead, Mr. Fultz filed suit. But on Thursday, a federal court in Lexington sided with the university and dismissed his case.
In a 32-page ruling, Judge Danny C. Reeves of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky accepted the university’s arguments that it was immune from being sued, and that Kentucky Mist had no standing to bring the case. The judge also chided the moonshine distillery as “attempting to create a controversy.”
Jay Blanton, a university spokesman, said the school was pleased with the “strongly worded opinion.” Mr. Fultz said he would press on with his broader effort to trademark his business name with the federal Patent and Trademark Office, though he conceded, “Our court case is kind of out the window.”
The flap between the moonshine maker and the basketball behemoth created an uproar in Whitesburg, a city of 2,100 people on the North Fork of the Kentucky River. Mr. Fultz, who lost a Republican primary bid this spring for the State House of Representatives, has gained a measure of celebrity, and many in Whitesburg regarded the university as a bully.
The court ruling has not changed that, said Dee Davis, the president and founder of the Center for Rural Strategies in Whitesburg, in an email message Thursday. “It just looks like the court sided with the big shot against the little fellow,” Mr. Davis wrote.
As for Mr. Fultz, he said he is already selling royal blue Kentucky Mist Moonshine shirts — and has no plans to stop. “We’re moonshiners,” he said. “There’s no way we’re going to back down.”

