Nancy Thompson Godfrey and A. Lee Lundy Jr. were married June 25 at the Peru Congregational Church in Peru, Vt. The Rev. Margaret Dawedeit, the church's pastor, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 72, operates her own corporate communications company in Scottsdale, Ariz. She graduated from Smith College, and is a daughter of Marian Thompson Rigney of Manchester, Vt., and the late Kenneth R. Thompson, and a stepdaughter of the late Dr. Thomas G. Rigney.
The groom, 73, is a senior partner in the Tydings & Rosenberg law firm in Baltimore. He graduated from Yale, received a law degree magna cum laude from Columbia and a master's degree in law from the University of Baltimore. He is a son of the late Blanche Lundy and the late Audie L. Lundy, who lived in Marks, Miss.
After the January 2015 death of Peter Godfrey, her spouse of almost 50 years, Ms. Godfrey decided to put most of her efforts into something she truly cared about –– her alma mater. She agreed to be co-editor of Smith's reunion book for the class of 1966, and as part of her duties, began calling spouses of deceased classmates to organize memorial essays. Her first call was Mr. Lundy, who had lost his wife Ann the year before.
When asked if they could go over some details, Mr. Lundy explained that there must have been some sort of mix-up; her co-editor had already called him. Ms. Godfrey apologized but neither of them could seem to put down the phone. “It was a nice conversation and we politely said goodbye and that was it,” Ms. Godfrey said.
But intrigued by the woman on the other end of the line, Mr. Lundy decided he wanted to talk again — via email — and Ms. Godfrey was willing. “I really wasn't looking for somebody,” he said. “I hadn't been to any dating sites. But this is a person who is a contemporary and knew my wife. So I continued to correspond with her.”
After weeks of emailing, they began talking over the phone, their daily conversations often lasting an hour or two, learning that they each had had brief engagements, have two children, a son and a daughter and they both lived abroad for a few years.
“Each of us were married for 48 years to smart people, and one really misses that,” Ms. Godfrey said. “It was great having personal and intellectual conversations again.”
When Ms. Godfrey suggested that Mr. Lundy should visit her on Thanksgiving weekend in Arizona, he quickly agreed. That visit went so well, they planned a four-day trip in January to Amelia Island, Fla., where (only the second time they had spent time together in person), he proposed and she accepted.
“We realized at our age, we have certain experiences through the years and understand the same references,” said Ms. Godfrey, who is moving to Baltimore. “The chemistry between us seemed right.”

