WIMBLEDON, England — An underwhelming television analyst, Boris Becker has turned out to be quite successful at analyzing what makes Novak Djokovic tick.
His tennis commentary for the BBC during Wimbledon — in which, from 2002 to 2013, he was often the master of the self-evident — was one of the reasons there was considerable skepticism about his ability to impart wisdom to Djokovic when they joined forces in December 2013.
But with Djokovic now the reigning champion at all four Grand Slam tournaments, the results speak for themselves, which is the way Becker, going against his own grain, seems to prefer it at this stage.
“It's not about me,” Becker said in a rare extended interview. “I'm very clear about that. I mean I love to talk, as you know. I was a journalist after my tennis career in television, but this is not about me. It's about Novak. It's his time to shine.”
Shine Djokovic has, supernova style. His record since Becker joined his coaching staff to work alongside Marian Vajda is 187-17, with 24 singles titles, six of them Grand Slam crowns. Djokovic's winning percentage before Becker's arrival was 80.4 percent. Since Becker's arrival, it is 91.7 percent.
Although it is difficult to determine precisely how much credit Becker deserves (Djokovic also had a fabulous season in 2011, before they teamed up), it is often the marginal improvements that prove decisive at the highest level.
“They took time to feel each other out, but it gels well,” said Roger Rasheed, who has coached Lleyton Hewitt and, most recently, Grigor Dimitrov. “I think Boris has done a great job in understanding Novak and keeping his own personal ego and status out of the way when coaching at all times. It's a great effort, as some cannot.”
Becker, a father of four children, feels the timing was right.
“I think I'm a much better coach now at 48 than I would have been at 38, because at 38, it was still a lot about me,” Becker said. “Now, the kids have grown older, so you become a little more mature, a little more about everybody else than you. And I think that gives me an advantage somehow with how I deal with Novak.
“My oldest son is 23. Novak's 29, and so the difference isn't that great.”
There have been tactical contributions, too.
“I think Boris has added value to what was already a great game of speed, reaction and ability by pushing Novak up on the baseline more, using his great assets in an even stronger way,” Rasheed said. “He has kept challenging Novak to develop and not sit still at No. 1.”
Progress was clear during Djokovic's run to his first French Open title this month. He excelled not only tight to the baseline but in the forecourt, where, on the slide or the run, he was often the triumphant cat to Andy Murray's mouse in the final.
“There is more forward thinking at bigger moments,” Rasheed said. “Novak doesn't wait. He makes it happen and controls the outcome with more confidence.”
Becker was an attacking player in heart and mind on his way to the No. 1 ranking, in 1991, and three Wimbledon singles titles. He also had that boom-boom serve, another sector of the game in which he appears to have made a positive impact on Djokovic. But his emphasis, according to Vajda, has been more on the mental game.
“Because he won six Grand Slam titles, Boris knows exactly what he's dealing with when it comes to the pressure,” said Vajda, a Slovak who peaked at No. 34 in the singles rankings in 1987.
Although Becker and Djokovic generally speak English together, they also communicate in German.
“Especially in the locker room, when other guys are around,” Becker said, chuckling. “It really helps that his interest is not just tennis. It's politics. It's about the economy. It's about different sports, so it never gets boring. And usually the topics don't repeat themselves.
“It helps that he speaks a few languages. When you talk to some of the other players, you realize after a 10- or 15-minute conversation that boy, that was long. How do you cover 10 minutes? But with him it never stops, because he's open-minded and wants to learn and wants to get better, and I think we feed off each other quite well that way.”
There is other common ground. Tennis was front and center in Germany when Becker and Steffi Graf were wunderkinds in the 1980s and '90s. Becker, with a big personality to match his big game, was a national obsession, which helps him relate to the even bigger societal role that Djokovic occupies in Serbia.
“I think that really helped, that in my early life, my teenager life, I had to deal with Germany,” Becker said. “His relationship with Serbia is very similar. Unless you've experienced it, you don't know what he's going through when he goes back home. But unless you'd been with me back home, you wouldn't know what I'm talking about, either.”
What is clear to many observers, including John McEnroe, is that the arrangement has benefited both parties. Becker, who long appeared to struggle to find his footing in middle age, looks happier and fitter. Hip surgery in 2014 helped, as did a change in diet. So, too, did returning to his natural habitat.
“Sport was always my life, and obviously, eventually, you have to retire and do something else, and I became a shirt-and-suit guy — the ties not so much — but a shirt-and-suit guy,” Becker said. “You go through different things and challenges, but in my heart I'm a sportsman. I love this sport. I love other sports, and if I can be around young sportsmen and sportswomen, I love that. It refreshes me. It's good for my soul. It's good for my body.
“I'm 48, but I feel like I'm 28 in many ways because I'm back in a track suit, back on the practice court,” he added. “I'm back with the coaches I used to play as a player, too, and that's a nice feeling.”
The list has increased in the past month, with Ivan Lendl rejoining Andy Murray's team and McEnroe, who briefly coached Becker in 1993, joining Milos Raonic's team for the grass-court season as a consultant.
“Great to see John back in the locker room and on Centre Court,” Becker said. “His knowledge of the game is second to none. I'm sure it will improve Milos in all areas. Just don't know about his look on the sidelines. He is always so well-dressed in the commentary booth.”
The booth is one domain where McEnroe, who will continue to do commentary at Wimbledon for the BBC, has an unmistakable edge over his former rival, even if McEnroe does not always grasp that less talk can be more.
“Some things are for some people, and some aren't,” McEnroe said. “I have never heard Boris do commentary in German, so I don't know. He might have been a different commentator in German, but in English it's not easy. Maybe he was thinking something different than what came out, and it came out sort of basic, like why is Boris just saying this? But it may have been, to some degree, the language.”
For now, however, Becker is on top of the coaching heap, with Djokovic the first man to hold all four major singles titles since Rod Laver did so in 1969. A true Grand Slam — winning all four in the same calendar year — remains possible.
“I think this has actually allowed Boris a way in, when his body had broken down and he was sort of off doing other things, and I think ultimately he's getting more satisfaction out of being part of this,” McEnroe said. “It was something where at the time they got together you weren't quite sure, but it turned out to be a win-win for the sport.
“Novak's handled it so well,” he added, “and Boris, the last couple years — I mean you've got to give him credit.”

