Within hours of the escape of two murderers from a maximum-security prison near the Canadian border last year, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said at a news conference that he would be “shocked” if any corrections officers had been involved in the breakout.
But an exhaustive report released this month by the state inspector general’s office singled out 20 uniformed and civilian employees whose laziness, incompetence and dereliction of duty enabled the killers, Richard W. Matt and David Sweat, to escape from the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, N.Y., last June.
While two of the employees — Gene Palmer, a guard, and Joyce E. Mitchell, a civilian supervisor — were imprisoned after pleading guilty last year to aiding the inmates, there have been few, if any, serious consequences for the 18 others, according to an examination of state payroll records by The New York Times. None has been fired, and, according to the Clinton County district attorney, none will be criminally prosecuted.
They included, as detailed in the report, a captain, two lieutenants and five guards who admitted to falsifying documents to make it look as if they had conducted nightly rounds; an officer who missed a foot-and-a-half-wide hole cut in the back wall of a cell during an inspection; and a guard who spent his time reading at his desk in the prison tailor shop, while Ms. Mitchell spent hours each day with one of the inmates plotting the escape.
Details of disciplinary measures imposed on Clinton employees in connection with the breakout had not previously been made public. But by matching the names of the 18 other prison employees listed in the report — 11 uniformed officers and seven civilians — against state payroll records, The Times found that three were just recently suspended without pay; six had retired rather than face departmental disciplinary charges but are collecting their full state pensions; and nine were still on the job.
When queried by The Times, state corrections officials provided a similar tabulation of disciplined employees. They said nine either retired or resigned; three are currently suspended without pay pending arbitration; one was demoted; and nine are back to work after receiving lesser penalties like being temporarily suspended or placed on probationary status.
It appears that not every officer who has been disciplined is named in the state report. A precise accounting is not possible because state confidentiality laws prohibit the release of names of corrections officers who are disciplined.
State officials said they were hamstrung in what they could do to punish prison employees by the collective bargaining agreement with the corrections officers’ union, which makes it almost impossible to fire a guard.
The next best option, officials said, was pressuring those implicated to retire. While that worked in several cases, state law dictates that even convicted felons like Ms. Mitchell and Mr. Palmer are entitled to their full pensions.
During the three-week hunt for the killers, the state deployed 1,300 officers at a cost of $23 million in overtime. Mr. Matt was fatally shot by a border patrol officer 40 miles from the prison; Mr. Sweat was wounded and captured shortly thereafter.
It was Mr. Cuomo who directed the inspector general, Catherine Leahy Scott, to prepare the 150-page report, which was based on interviews with 175 current and former prison employees.
But investigators said they were repeatedly stymied by the prison’s executive management team, civilian employees and uniformed officers, who refused to cooperate, lied, gave misleading answers or conveniently forgot events.
“They testified they could not recall such information as the names of colleagues with whom they regularly worked,” the report said.
Steven Racette, the prison’s superintendent at the time, was among those cited for being less than forthcoming. Investigators concluded that the practice of falsifying count slips — forms certifying that cell checks had been done — by officers on the overnight shift had been going on for years. But when they questioned Mr. Racette, who was a 37-year veteran of the corrections department, he told them, “I haven’t heard of that,” according to the report. Stephen Brown, the deputy superintendent for security, told investigators, “Yes it would be a surprise, yes sir.”
Mr. Racette retired within weeks of the escape and is collecting an annual pension of $84,406, according to payroll records; Mr. Brown is collecting a $64,088 yearly pension.
The report is especially critical of Allan Trombley, the guard assigned to monitor the prison tailor shop where the two inmates worked; and Lt. Terry Brunet, who oversaw the nightly cell checks on the honor block, where they were housed.
Fraternization between the civilian staff and inmates at a maximum-security prison is strictly prohibited. But according to the findings, Ms. Mitchell and Mr. Matt talked for hours daily, uninterrupted, enabling her to sneak him hacksaw blades, chisels and drill bits that the two men used to cut holes in their cells and to disappear into the tunnels beneath the prison.
Investigators said that Officer Trombley spent his days reading books and magazines, and even handed out baked goods that Ms. Mitchell brought for the inmates. “Trombley testified that he never observed the illicit passing of notes between Matt and Mitchell, which Mitchell admitted occurred daily,” the report said.
As overnight supervisor, Lieutenant Brunet certified that Mr. Matt and Mr. Sweat were in their cells, when in truth they had already escaped hours before. When the inmates were discovered missing, he then erased his signature, the report said.
During questioning, Lieutenant Brunet claimed he had “signed by accident,” according to the report, an alibi investigators described as “tortured” and “far-fetched.”
“I understand how ridiculous it sounds,” he told investigators, adding that he might have thought he was signing another piece of paper.
Both Mr. Trombley, who earns $63,403 a year, and Lieutenant Brunet, who makes $97,478, continued to collect their salaries for 10 months after the escape, until April, when they were suspended without pay. They are in the process of challenging the department’s efforts to fire them.
The report was also critical of the corrections commissioner’s office in Albany, noting that many of the most egregious security lapses could have been avoided if there had been better oversight.
A few months before the escape, Joseph Bellnier, a deputy commissioner, wrote Clinton’s leadership team a memo highlighting the importance of complying with front gate and count procedures, as well as inspecting “all industry and maintenance areas.”
“Do not overlook basements, attics, tunnels,” the deputy commissioner wrote.
But the directive was meaningless, the report said, noting that Mr. Bellnier did not require superintendents to confirm compliance, nor did he conduct his own follow-up.
Patricia LeConey, an assistant commissioner, conducted on-site visits at Clinton in 2014 and 2015, concluding that the prison was in “full compliance” with the security measures she inspected, including the accuracy of logbooks as well as tool and contraband control. According to investigators, when they asked Ms. LeConey whether such visits were useful for detecting security lapses, she replied, “Not really.”
Mr. Bellnier continues to work as a deputy commissioner at a salary of $162,758; Ms. LeConey retired five months after the escape with an annual pension of $134,059, according to payroll records.
Mr. Bellnier’s and Ms. LeConey’s boss, Anthony Annucci, the acting commissioner, who has run the department since 2013, has also held onto his job since the escape.
A spokesman for the governor said in a statement that Mr. Annucci has “served the state for 37 years,” “worked closely with the inspector general during her investigation” and “been tasked with implementing significant changes to strengthen our correctional system.”
Though Mr. Cuomo conducted numerous news conferences during the manhunt, since the report was released on June 6, he has made no public comment on the investigation.
After a query from The Times, a spokesman for the governor provided a statement thanking the inspector general for the “comprehensive” review and pledging to implement the recommendations.
When it comes to potential criminal charges, there is disagreement among the agencies involved. The inspector general’s office concluded that a “number” of prison employees had committed crimes and, according to the report, forwarded their cases to the Clinton County district attorney’s office for prosecution.
But only a week after the inspector general’s findings were made public this month, Andrew J. Wylie, the district attorney, said there “will not be any criminal prosecutions resulting from the report.”
Mr. Wylie also contradicted the inspector general’s office, saying “there have been no actual referrals.” To which the inspector general, Catherine Leahy Scott, replied through a spokesman that Mr. Wylie “was repeatedly briefed throughout the investigation” and that her office would be only too happy to provide any “insight and evidence” the district attorney might need.

