For the last four years, Adriano Espaillat has struggled in the political shadow of Representative Charles B. Rangel, unable to topple him in two consecutive Democratic primaries.
Now, Mr. Rangel is taking his raspy voice and his deep reservoir of voter loyalty into retirement, seemingly clearing a path for Mr. Espaillat, a state senator, to realize his ambition of becoming the first politician born in the Dominican Republic to be elected to the House of Representatives.
His campaign chant is “Es pa’llá que vamos” (“That’s where we’re going”).
But among the nine candidates in Tuesday’s Democratic primary in the 13th Congressional District in Upper Manhattan and part of the Bronx, there is a new obstacle, in the form of an old nemesis: Guillermo Linares, another pioneering Dominican-born politician who threatens to split the vote among their immigrant countrymen.
“They will cancel each other out,” said Nestor Montilla, the chairman of the Dominican American National Roundtable, a nonpartisan group. “They should have sat down and come to an agreement.” He added, “It’s a matter of math, right?”
But agreement has been elusive for Mr. Espaillat, 61, and Mr. Linares, 65, for most of the last quarter-century. They are rivals whose political lives have been intertwined since they emerged on the electoral stage and each has vied for firsts. Mr. Linares became the first Dominican immigrant elected to the City Council (and, he says, the first elected to any public office in the United States); Mr. Espaillat claimed the title of the first person born in the Dominican Republic elected to the State Legislature in New York — or perhaps in any state.
“They’re like two male crabs in a hole,” said Luis M. Rodriguez, a Dominican activist who has watched Mr. Espaillat and Mr. Linares claw and poke for years as they vied for ascendance in the small but growing Dominican community of Upper Manhattan.
Mr. Espaillat is one of the front-runners in the nine-candidate race — he is among the leaders in fund-raising and has the experience of running in the last two primaries. And he could emerge the winner even with a split Dominican vote, by pulling support from other constituencies in the district, including blacks, whites and Puerto Ricans. Or Mr. Linares could score the upset he has predicted with a similar strategy.
Upper Manhattan’s congressional seat has long been identified with Harlem and black political power. The district was created in the 1940s to make way for an African-American to be elected to Congress from New York, and only two men have represented it since then. The first was Adam Clayton Powell Jr., an icon of African-American politics in the last century. After him came Mr. Rangel, a man with many accomplishments and a few ethical scars, who will have completed 46 years in the House by the time he steps down next year — one of the longest tenures in the history of Congress.
But the area and the district have changed from what was once a primarily black and Puerto Rican stronghold. The Dominican population has grown and when the district’s boundaries were redrawn a few years ago to include part of the Bronx, many thought it was inevitable that the district would eventually send a Dominican, for the first time, to Congress.
Mr. Espaillat emerged as the main hopeful. He lost by just 1,086 votes to Mr. Rangel in the 2012 primary. In the 2014 primary he lost by 2,258 votes.
“I ran twice against Charlie Rangel, did very well, both nail-biters,” Mr. Espaillat said during a recent day of campaigning. He added that if he could receive as many votes as he did in his previous races, “I win this hands down.”
Mr. Espaillat said he wanted to be an advocate for New York City in Washington, describing how the portion of the New York City budget that comes from the federal government had plummeted since the 1970s.
“It’s become fashionable for Congress members to deny New York City money,” he said. “I want to go there and push back and change that culture where denying New York City is a feather in your cap.”
But as Mr. Espaillat made his way around Washington Heights, which is like a Dominican village relocated to Manhattan Island — merengue music blares from stores, men wear baseball caps with the logos of Dominican teams, restaurants serve mofongo and mondongo, coconuts are sold on street corners — several voters expressed concern that a split vote could rob them of the pride of electing one of their own.
“What’s going on with you and Linares?” said Leonildo Martinez, 83, as he enthusiastically embraced Mr. Espaillat during a campaign stop at a senior center. In a pale blue guayabera shirt and a Yankees cap, Mr. Martinez said that he planned to vote for Mr. Espaillat and that he wished the two politicians would join forces. “The votes are worth more if they’re together,” Mr. Martinez said.
In the 1980s, Mr. Espaillat and Mr. Linares belonged to rival political groups with ties to parties or political movements back home. Eventually, Mr. Espaillat became president of the 34th Police Precinct Community Council in Washington Heights; Mr. Linares became a member of the local school board. Both claim the accomplishments as firsts for Dominican immigrants.
In the late 1980s, a new City Council district was created centering on Washington Heights, making it likely that a Dominican would be elected for the first time.
Both men ran in the Democratic primary — their first electoral face-off.
Mr. Linares won, and soon after was elected to the City Council.
After that, Mr. Espaillat and Mr. Linares seemed to be always clashing, often backing or recruiting each other’s election opponents or dispatching surrogates or loyalists to run against one another for party leadership posts and other titles.
They reached an uneasy truce in 2010 when Mr. Espaillat, who was then in the State Assembly, ran for State Senate, and Mr. Linares ran to occupy the seat that Mr. Espaillat was vacating. Both won.
But in 2012, Mr. Linares endorsed Mr. Rangel over Mr. Espaillat. Later that year, Mr. Linares challenged Mr. Espaillat for his Senate seat in the Democratic primary — and Mr. Espaillat’s campaign circulated a flier calling his rival a traitor to Latinos for his Rangel endorsement. Mr. Espaillat beat Mr. Linares in the primary by a wide margin.
Mr. Linares again endorsed Mr. Rangel in 2014.
Now, in the Congressional primary, Mr. Espaillat is third in total fund-raising among the nine candidates, having raised $444,118, according to the most recent reports filed with the Federal Election Commission on June 16.
The candidate who has raised the most money is Keith L.T. Wright, a member of the State Assembly from central Harlem who was endorsed by Mr. Rangel. He had contributions totaling $742,927, according to his campaign’s latest report.
Mr. Linares, in contrast, had raised only $62,450. A campaign aide for Mr. Linares said last week that they had not yet done any mailings, in a district that had been flooded by mailings from other candidates.
Other candidates in the race include Adam Clayton Powell IV, a former assemblyman and city councilman who is the son of Mr. Rangel’s predecessor in Congress, Adam Clayton Powell Jr.; Clyde Williams, a former policy director of the Democratic National Committee, who has raised $485,534; and Suzan Johnson Cook, a member of the clergy who was appointed an ambassador at large for international religious freedom by President Obama.
There is little to separate the candidates on the issues, so those who have served in elective office have pointed to their experience; there, too, the candidates have generally spent long periods as legislators, and voters may see little to differentiate them.
Mr. Espaillat said that he was not worried about splitting the Dominican vote with Mr. Linares, arguing that there were more candidates to divide African-American votes.
“Adam Powell hurts Wright more than Linares hurts me,” he said. “And then you have Clyde Williams and the reverend. They all pull from Keith’s base.”
Mr. Linares is close to Mr. Rangel and Mr. Wright. But he said that he was not in the race merely to take votes away from Mr. Espaillat, adding that he expected to win.
“This is not about the rivalry that some people may see,” he said. “This is not about personalities. For me it’s always been about the needs and priorities of New Yorkers.”
Milagros Ricourt, a professor of Latino studies at Lehman College in the Bronx, said that sending a Dominican to Congress would be a milestone.
“It’s something that is going to be so good for us in terms of incorporation into American society,” said Ms. Ricourt, who was born in the Dominican Republic. But she feared that with Mr. Espaillat and Mr. Linares splitting the vote, the Dominicans would be shut out again.
“It’s not going to happen because of African-Americans, it’s not going to happen because of whites, it’s not going to happen because of Puerto Ricans,” she said. “It’s going to happen because of division within the Dominican community.”

