NEW HAVEN — Officials in this city declared a public health emergency on Friday after nearly 20 people overdosed this week on either tainted heroin or cocaine, at least three of them fatally, here and in surrounding towns.
Officials said there had been up to 16 heroin or cocaine overdoses in New Haven since Thursday and several more nearby. Two people died in New Haven and at least one more died in a surrounding town, officials said.
The numbers were expected to rise, according to officials, who urged drug users to be careful.
The police were trying to determine whether the powerful painkiller fentanyl or another substance had played a role in the overdoses. Patients who were able to speak with city police said they thought they had bought cocaine and not heroin, Officer David Hartman, a spokesman for the New Haven Police Department, said.
Officials said they were working to arrange for quick testing of drugs that had been seized.
Most of the overdoses in New Haven were in the city’s neighborhoods of Newhallville and Dixwell. Cases had also been reported in the towns of West Haven and Shelton, Officer Hartman said.
State health officials said that 700 doses of the overdose-reversing drug Narcan were being sent to New Haven, where officials said there was a shortage of the drug.
Gov. Dannel P. Malloy called the situation dangerous.
“Everyone must recognize that no region of the country, state, city or town is immune — this affects all of us and so many families across our state and nation,” Mr. Malloy, a Democrat, said in a statement. “That’s why we have been doing everything in our power to stop this epidemic and prevent tragedy.”
Connecticut’s Office of the Chief Medical Examiner reported that 208 people had died from accidental drug overdoses in Connecticut from January to March and that the total by year’s end would be around 832 — up from 729 last year and more than double the total in 2012.
Senators Richard Blumenthal and Chris Murphy, both of whom are Democrats, called on Congress to do more to fight overdoses nationwide.
“Congress must reverse its laggard response to this national public health crisis by providing real resources,” said Mr. Blumenthal, adding that an increase in “treatment services, law enforcement support, opioid over-prescription prevention and other steps” was “urgent and critical.”

