Phil Jackson will get to explain on Thursday evening what inspired him to bet on Derrick Rose and his surgically repaired knees, as Jackson is scheduled to address the news media before the N.B.A. draft begins.
On its own, the multiplayer deal Jackson made Wednesday with the Chicago Bulls offers clues as to what is on his mind as he again reconfigures the Knicks in advance of his third full season as the team’s president.
Not many would have figured Rose to be Jackson’s kind of point guard, Rose appearing to be from the kind of ball-dominant, screen-and-roll, high-volume-shooter school of basketball that Jackson has taken every opportunity to denigrate since he returned to New York.
By early next season, Rose will be 28, and probably not too interested in drastically changing the way he plays. This is more evidence that Jeff Hornacek, the Knicks’ new coach, will dictate the style of offense to be played by the team and that Jackson’s beloved triangle could often be dormant, if not totally disabled.
Although diminished since his season as most valuable player (2010-11), Rose has celebrity box-office appeal. He is a three-time All-Star, a conversation piece for those lower-bowl fans paying college-tuition-level prices to snap smartphone photos of Celebrity Row attendees and watch a team that has won three playoff series since the turn of the century.
With another marquee name to market, the Madison Square Garden strongman James L. Dolan is less likely to kick over office wastepaper baskets. And with a record of 49-115 over the past two seasons, even Jackson, with 11 championship coaching rings, has to wonder what the man who signs his check is thinking.
We are learning that Jackson isn’t as set in his ways as he has been made out to be. The shift in philosophy could also reflect a basic instinct to survive. Jackson may sense that he needs to make the playoffs to keep Dolan from agitating for change.
The sacrifices of Robin Lopez, hardworking center and solid citizen, and of point guards young and old (Jerian Grant and Jose Calderon) does not perceptibly affect the Knicks’ future — unless Rose gets hurt or leaves as a free agent next summer and Grant, a fine athlete with good defensive footwork, develops into a star or a high-level starter.
Then Jackson would have more explaining to do, possibly from a condo in Los Angeles.
The other assets coming from Chicago are Justin Holiday, a 6-foot-6 swingman who has something no one on the current Knicks roster has — a championship ring (Golden State, 2014-15) — and a 2017 second-round pick. The Bulls had obviously become desperate for separation from Rose, a Chicago product who could use a fresh start himself.
For the Knicks, bringing him in with one season left on his contract is about Jackson trying to have it both ways: continuing to pin hopes of glory days on the development of the Latvian giant Kristaps Porzingis while surrounding Porzingis with enough veteran talent to allow this long-suffering franchise to live more in the moment.
That strategy could also benefit the development of Porzingis, a point the network analyst and former Knicks coach Jeff Van Gundy made earlier in the past season.
“You talk about starting over, developing a young team around Porzingis, but one of the things that’s always overlooked about player development is playing meaningful games,” Van Gundy said. “Even if you don’t make the playoffs, what’s essential for guys like Porzingis is to be playing in games that count, instead of just playing out a season like they did this year.”
Like Dolan, Carmelo Anthony should be happy with the deal, at least until Rose launches one of those step-back 23-footers in the dying seconds of a 1-point game.
Here is the potential upside: Playing at a faster pace, as Hornacek has promised, should create enough scoring opportunities for Anthony, Rose and Porzingis, who is still young, new and nice enough to defer.
Additional reinforcements should arrive through the roughly $30 million in cap space Jackson still has for the coming free-agency sweepstakes. Does Rose help attract talent? Will one of his former Bulls teammates, Joakim Noah or Pau Gasol, be the new center?
On Twitter, Jackson follows 61 people, an eclectic bunch that includes the actor John Lithgow, the Vietnamese Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh and Noah, who has never played for Jackson but who is clearly his kind of Zen operator.
A New York-bred free agent, Noah is a splendid post passer, a dirty-work doer. He and Rose were the heart of the former coach Tom Thibodeau’s ferociously competitive Bulls teams. Alas, like Rose, Noah, 31, has in recent years been prone to injuries.
Healthy, Noah would be an upgrade compared to Lopez on both ends of the floor and, as Lopez was, a terrific mentor for Porzingis. But does Jackson have the stomach for two health-risk acquisitions in the same season?
Does he dare pursue the 30-going-on-13, free-throw bricklaying but still physically imposing Dwight Howard?
This Rose deal will become easier to evaluate once we know what the rest of the roster looks like. Until then, Jackson has succeeded in making the Knicks a conversation piece on the eve of a draft he doesn’t have a pick in and on the day two players he traded in his last roster remake — Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith — were sitting pretty in the Cleveland Cavaliers’ championship parade.
At this point, only through Rose-colored glasses could anyone believe the trade will make the Knicks much more than a low-level playoff contender.

