It’s supposed to be festive. It’s supposed to be fun. But most of the time, if I’m out with a friend for cocktails, and she excitedly says, “Let’s start with something fizzy!” I deflate a little. Unpleasant visions of endless-mimosa brunches in my 20s and their aftermaths arise.
But I’m not so hardhearted as to be completely resistant to bubbles. Bubbles feel good. They really do signify joy. And in the right drink and under the right circumstances — a hot summer day, especially when I’m feeling celebratory — they’re exactly what I want, too.
Usually, when I have a mad craving for bubbles, I order a glass of Champagne and leave it at that. But sparkling wines can be wonderful when mixed, even with orange juice and other ingredients and a little extra effort that distinguish the resulting drink from the dreaded mimosa, as in Gates Otsuji’s Mona Lisa. Some consider it a waste to use very good wine in a cocktail; it will certainly increase the cost, but it may increase the quality and flavor too. If you can afford to do it, go ahead.
I favor cava — the popular Spanish wine, most of which is made in Catalonia — when I do not want to mix anything with Champagne. I suspect that’s because, unlike many other sparkling wines, it is made in the same way as Champagne: Still wine is bottled, yeast and sugar are added and then the second fermentation, which creates the bubbles, happens in the bottle. Although cava and Champagne are generally made from different grapes, the shared method creates a family resemblance.
Many fine, classic cocktails are made with Champagne. Among the best-known are the French 75 (gin or Cognac, lemon juice and a bit of sugar topped with Champagne) and the Kir royale (couldn’t be simpler: a tiny amount of crème de cassis and lots of Champagne). But for me, Champagne cocktails are like people: I gravitate to the ones with the best stories.
This means that Death in the Afternoon, an aptly heady mixture of Champagne and absinthe, appeals to me enormously. The earliest known recipe was published in the magnificently named 1935 cocktail book “So Red the Nose, or — Breath in the Afternoon,” to which many well-known authors contributed. By way of explanation, Hemingway wrote about the drink: “This was arrived at by the author and three officers of H.M.S. Danae after having spent seven hours overboard trying to get Capt. Bra Saunders’ fishing boat off a bank where she had gone with us in a N.W. gale.”
Another favorite is the Punch Romaine. Originally a slushie of sorts, this drink is perhaps best remembered as a palate cleanser “served as the sixth course of the Titanic’s final first-class dinner,” write Talia Baiocchi and Leslie Pariseau in their book “Spritz.” Baiocchi and Pariseau offer an updated version (the legendary chef Escoffier devised the original), which is beautifully refreshing. But given these two tales, perhaps it’s best to keep boats and Champagne cocktails far apart. I recommend a comfortable chair or patio instead.
Recipes: Death in the Afternoon | Mona Lisa | Punch Romaine

