INTERNATIONAL
A Q.-and-A. article on May 28 about the Venezuelan economic crisis misstated one consequence of a devaluation of the bolívar, the Venezuelan currency. It would make debts denominated in dollars — not bolívars — more expensive to repay.
NATIONAL
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the reaction of undocumented immigrants to the recent Supreme Court ruling on President Obama's immigration policies, misstated the requirements for young immigrants to live and work legally in the United States under a policy established by the president in 2012. They had to meet certain age requirements and had to have lived in the country for at least five years when the program took effect; they did not need to have graduated from college or completed two years of military service.
WEEKEND
An art review on Friday about an exhibition of photographs by Lucas Samaras, at the Craig F. Starr Gallery in Manhattan, misstated Mr. Samaras's age at the time he acquired a Polaroid 360 camera in 1969. He was 33, not 23.
SUNDAY STYLES
The byline for an article on Sunday about Hope Hicks, the 27-year-old press secretary for Donald J. Trump, was omitted in some editions. The article was by Michael M. Grynbaum.
NEW YORK
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the extension of a state program for low-income H.I.V. patients paraphrased incorrectly from comments by Alphonso David, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo's counsel, about what the governor had to do in order to expand services in New York City. Mr. David said Mr. Cuomo had to find a way to work around a reluctant State Legislature, not find a way to work with it.
•
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the race to fill the Congressional seat currently held by Charles B. Rangel referred incompletely in one instance to the area included in New York's 13th Congressional District. As correctly noted elsewhere in the article, it covers Upper Manhattan and part of the Bronx, not just Upper Manhattan.
OBITUARIES
An obituary on Monday about Jim Hickman, who played for the Mets in their early years, erroneously attributed a distinction to him. Rod Kanehl, not Hickman, was the first Met to hit a grand slam. The error was repeated in a subheading.
The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

