Those watching the Senate this week saw lawmakers vote down attempts to advance four gun safety measures, two offered by Democrats and two by Republicans.
Those proposals were just a sample of the contentious amendments lawmakers are trying to tack on to a measure funding the Commerce and Justice Departments, a bill that is often a magnet for constitutional and national security skirmishes.
For example, Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, is championing a provision that would expand the authority of the F.B.I. to obtain electronic records without judicial review in the course of security investigations.
Mr. McCain also seeks to make permanent existing authorities under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act to monitor so-called lone-wolf terrorist attackers. He went to the Senate floor to defend his ideas in the context of the shooting in Orlando, Fla., and he was strongly opposed by Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, a privacy advocate.
Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, has a measure that would give the secretary of state the power to strip citizenship from people who associate with terrorist groups. The measure has been stalled for months as a stand-alone bill in the Judiciary Committee.
“We've seen Americans like Jose Padilla, Anwar al-Awlaki, like Faisal Shahzad, who have abandoned their country and gone and joined up with the terrorists in waging war against us,” Mr. Cruz said on the Senate floor.
Mr. Cruz's measure is opposed by liberal and conservative groups. A consortium of human rights, civil liberties and religious organizations sent a letter to senators warning that the measure was too broad, noting that an American who travels outside the country to provide humanitarian assistance or other things in a troubled region could be mistakenly accused of providing material support or resources to terrorists and have their passport revoked. Some conservative groups have argued that the measure has extreme due process flaws. Mr. Cruz has failed to show up at Judiciary Committee meetings where his bill was scheduled to be discussed.

