LEGEND has it that in the early 1960s, Ferruccio Lamborghini, an Italian tractor maker, thought the Ferrari sports car he owned could be improved. But his suggestions to the car's designer, Enzo Ferrari, were rebuffed. Thus began a rivalry, as Mr. Lamborghini entered the performance-car business, resulting in some stunning art and engineering.
But Ferruccio didn't just compete with Enzo out of spite. Mr. Lamborghini was enough of an industrialist that he figured repurposed parts would be a way to achieve manufacturing efficiencies. That philosophy remains, as evident in Lamborghini's newest way to risk losing your driver's license: the Huracán LP 580-2.
The car is a rear-wheel-drive version of the Lamborghini 4-wheel-drive LP 610-4. The 580's 7-speed dual-clutch gearbox is shared with the 610. So is the 5.2-liter V10 engine.
But the engineers didn't simply dispense with the front drive axle and pronounce it a new car. The 580's front and rear fascias are different from the 610's. There are also a retuned suspension, recalibrated stability controls, new power management and steering setup. And the new car's V10 pumps out 580 horsepower, compared with the 610's — you guessed it — 610 horses.
And keeping things in the family, the Huracán uses the same aluminum and carbon-fiber chassis that used for the Audi R8. (Yes, like Audi, Lamborghini is owned by Volkswagen.)
LP stands for longitudinal posterior, and the final digit represents how many wheels propel the car. Oh, and so that you can sound extra cool at the next cocktail party, the dash in the name is spoken. So it's “five eighty dash two.”
Why ditch the 610's all-wheel drive and its ability to maximize traction and lap times? Emotion. The 580 is all about getting the tail to break away in a controlled manner. To be sure, inducing oversteer on public roads with a car as capable as Huracán is a bad idea. But certainly the rear-drive essence can be felt. In a straight line, Lamborghini claims Huracán howls to 60 miles per hour in 3.4 seconds.
Huracán can be a daily driver. And who wouldn't want to show off the aggressive origamilike aluminum body? But understand that the ride quality is very firm and a full day spent behind the flat-bottomed wheel will leave a driver drained. Cross-country excursions are ill advised, if only because a single small suitcase is all that can be stuffed into the front trunk. Storage nooks are scattered throughout the cabin, but trips to Home Depot with a Huracán would be unwise.
Drive modes provide various amounts of stability control safety net — Strada being the most relaxed, and Corsa apparently Italian for “make sure the insurance bill has been paid.”
At cruise, half the cylinder banks shut down. If it matters to you, I averaged 18 miles per gallon on premium fuel, although the E.P.A. rates it at 14 m.p.g. in the city and 21 on the highway.
The impeccably crafted cabin gets the same angular geometry as the exterior. A honeycomb motif gives the impression the interior was designed by bees. The LCD display gauge cluster is configurable, using an interface knob clearly swiped from Audi. All information is front and center, so some of it gets blocked when the wheel is turned.
Starting at around $200,000 including the gas-guzzler tax, the 580-2 is Lamborghini's most affordable model. As tested, it's $221,000. Many of the features, like the $3,500 front lift system to keep the chin scrape-free, are helpful. A rear camera package at $3,900 is essentially mandatory unless you're traveling with a spotting crew.
The all-wheel-drive Huracán 610-4 may eek out better track times. But there's more joy in the corners with the 580-2. Given that Lamborghini was born out of an argument, it's fitting that passion is what this car is all about.

