BANGOR, Me. — Pressing his staunch opposition to trade deals, Donald J. Trump escalated his attacks on the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday, saying it was “totally controlled by the special interest groups.”
“They’re a special interest that wants to have the deals that they want to have,” he told a packed arena at a rally here, to whoops and cheers. “They want to have T.P.P., the Trans-Pacific Partnership, one of the worst deals, and it’ll be the worst deal since Nafta.”
The remarks criticizing the Chamber were yet another manifestation of the divide between the Republican economic orthodoxy that embraces all trade, and the nationalistic anti-trade policies Mr. Trump laid out in a major speech Tuesday in a Pittsburgh suburb.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is often a strong ally of Republican candidates, spending more than $35 million in the 2014 midterms in support of them. But it has also been sharply critical of Mr. Trump’s views on trade, and has frequently posted articles critical of him on its blog, including one Tuesday night on its website titled, “The 2013 Trump Was a Lot Better on Trade Than the 2016 Version.”
Mr. Trump first responded to the group on Twitter Wednesday morning, but he escalated the attacks at his rally here, saying the Chamber was “controlled totally by various groups of people that don’t care about you whatsoever.”
A spokeswoman for the Chamber, Blair Latoff Holmes, defended its position on trade.
“The U.S. Chamber represents American businesses of all sizes from across the country, who recognize that free trade agreements, like the T.P.P., are an important way to accelerate economic growth and spur job creation in the U.S.,” she said.
“This is not personal,” Ms. Holmes added. “It’s not election politics. It’s smart policy.”
Mr. Trump’s remarks on the Chamber were the latest in a string of comments that have further divided those in the Republican ranks as he seeks to rally the party behind his campaign after a particularly contentious nominating fight.
That bruising battle was still on Mr. Trump’s mind Wednesday. He spent several minutes riffing on the “pledge” that Republican candidates all signed early in the primary contest to ultimately rally behind the party’s nominee, whoever was chosen.
“They broke their word, in my opinion,” he said. “They should never be allowed to run for public office again, because what they did is disgraceful.”
But while he spent the majority of his speech highlighting his trade policies and themes from his economic speech on Tuesday, he largely shied away from talking about the terrorist attacks in Istanbul later that day, although he noted how they seemed to overtake the news of his speech.
“I gave a speech in Pittsburgh, in Pennsylvania yesterday, and it was very well received,” Mr. Trump said. “Then you had the tragedy in Turkey, and that was the end of that speech, which was fine.
“That’s the way it’s supposed to be because that tragedy is a disgrace, that we can allow that to continue to go on whether it’s Turkey or anywhere else. That’s a disgrace.”
But while he pledged to fight the Islamic State and terrorism, he also professed a dovish foreign policy in an attempt to contrast himself with Hillary Clinton.
“They say, ‘Oh, can we trust Donald with a button?’ ” Mr. Trump said, adding, “I would be the slowest with the button, but I would be the one that doesn’t have to use it because they’re going to respect us again.”

