“Shuffle Along,” one of the most ambitious and anticipated musicals of the theater season just ended, will close next month, abruptly and unexpectedly, the show's producers said Thursday.
The July 24 closing is a surprise because the show, which explores the back story and aftermath of one of the first all-black musicals on Broadway, has been doing well at the box office, grossing nearly $973,686 last week, with a healthy average ticket price of $127. Directed by George C. Wolfe, it was nominated for 10 Tony Awards but won none.
The show, with a full title of “Shuffle Along, or The Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed,” was apparently facing a sharp drop-off in ticket sales this summer, after its leading actress, Audra McDonald, is scheduled to begin a maternity leave. The musician Rhiannon Giddens had been cast as Ms. McDonald's replacement and had already begun rehearsals.
“Audra McDonald is the biggest star on Broadway, and audiences have been clamoring to see her in this role since the first preview of ‘Shuffle Along' in March of this year,” the show's lead producer, Scott Rudin, said in a written statement.
He said he was happy for her but that “the need for Audra to take a prolonged and unexpected hiatus from the show has determined the unfortunate inevitability of our running at a loss for significantly longer than the show can responsibly absorb, and we have decided to close the show when she leaves on July 24.”
Ms. McDonald, also in a written statement, described herself as “overjoyed to be expecting a new addition to my family yet completely heartbroken that our tremendously talented cast and company — my ‘Shuffle Family' — won't be able to continue telling this incredible story.”
The show has a powerhouse cast, featuring the Tony Award winners Brian Stokes Mitchell and Billy Porter, as well as the nominees Brandon Victor Dixon and Joshua Henry, and one of the nation's best-known tap dancers, Savion Glover, as its choreographer.
But Ms. McDonald, who has six Tony awards, is among Broadway's biggest stars. She was always planning to leave the show temporarily this summer, initially so she could reprise her Tony-winning role in “Lady Day at Emerson's Bar & Grill” in London. But, at 45, she unexpectedly got pregnant (she is married to the actor Will Swenson); she canceled the London production, extended her stay on Broadway and scheduled the maternity leave. Recently she has been performing in six of eight shows a week.
At the time of its closing, “Shuffle Along” will have played 38 previews and 100 regular performances. The show cost $12 million to mount.

