NEW YORK
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about letters by and about President Obama's father, using information from officials in the 2008 presidential campaign, misstated the decade in which a picture of father and son was taken. It was the 1970s, not the 1960s.
METROPOLITAN
An article in some editions last Sunday about efforts to improve diversity in the Westchester Philharmonic included an incorrect figure from the League of American Orchestras for the percentage of Latinos in American orchestras. It is 2.5 percent, not 1.2 percent.
•
A film listing in the Westchester Calendar in some copies last Sunday misstated part of the name of a movie showing at Time & Space Limited in Hudson, N.Y., through July 3. It is “Bayou Maharajah” not “Bayou Maharaj.”
OBITUARIES
An obituary last Sunday about the author Lois Duncan misidentified, in some copies, the city in Florida where she died. It is Bradenton, not Sarasota. The obituary also misstated, in some copies, the surname of one of her daughters, who survives her. She is Robin Burkin, not Robin Arquette.
THE MAGAZINE
An article on June 12 about segregation in New York City schools misstated the number of buildings from the Farragut Houses, a public-housing project in Brooklyn, that were previously included in P.S. 307's attendance zone. It was five of the 10 buildings, not seven.
ARTS & LEISURE
A picture caption with an article last Sunday about the Ojai Music Festival misstated Scott Reed's relationship to the festival. He resigned from the festival's board in January; he is not a current board member.
•
An article last Sunday about the director Nicolas Winding Refn referred incorrectly to advertisements directed by Mr. Refn that feature the actor Matthew McConaughey. Mr. McConaughey appears in the advertisements, for Lincoln; they are not simply “voice-over commercials.”
•
A picture caption with an article last Sunday about the play “Oslo” misspelled the surname of an actor shown at rehearsal. He is Anthony Azizi, not Aziz.
TRAVEL
An article last Sunday about a fear of roller coasters misstated the surname of the editor of ThemeParkInsider.com. He is Robert Niles, not Miles.
SUNDAY BUSINESS
An article last Sunday about shrinking job prospects and mounting debt for law students misstated the timetable under which the government would forgive the debt incurred by John Acosta, a graduate of Valparaiso University Law School who is setting up his own criminal law practice. It would be forgiven in 20 years, not 25 years.
A Note to Readers
The notices on Pages 4 and 10 of Sunday Styles stating that Bill Cunningham is off this week were printed before the news of his death on Saturday.
The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper's journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

