Invest in good equipment. At a minimum, you'll need a digital SLR camera; ­short-, mid- and long-range lenses; multiple batteries; extra cords; and a laptop. Rick Mendoza, a veteran paparazzo based in Los Angeles, carries 50 pounds of gear in a backpack. Expect start-up costs of at least $8,000.
Study your state's privacy and harassment laws. Stick with public figures in public places. Don't aim your camera into people's homes, and avoid frightening famous children. Shoot every celebrity you see, but in order for your agent — you'll need one — to sell images to tabloids and websites, your pictures must evoke narrative tension. “A photo needs a story,” Mendoza says. Often you'll find yourself amid a scrum of paparazzi, so prepare for violence. “You're going to get your face punched,” Mendoza says. “You're going to get your camera broken. People do bad things for money.” (Mendoza once got “high five figures” for a photo of Zsa Zsa Gabor inside an ambulance.)
Cultivate valets, restaurant servers, hotel staff members and airport employees for tips. Offer cash if they text you with the whereabouts of stars. Memorize the makes, models and last three digits of license-­plate numbers of celebrities' vehicles. Mendoza starts his workday at 6 a.m., driving by coffee shops and yoga studios. This constant predator-­like state will change you, heighten your senses and make you keenly attuned to your surroundings. “I've never been patient in my life,” Mendoza says. “I learned patience waiting 12 hours for a three-­second opportunity to shoot Lindsay Lohan.”
Sometimes celebrities will scream at you, try to knock your camera away, treat you like a vulture feeding off the viscera of others' lives. Don't let those sentiments get you down. “Remind yourself: You're here to do a job,” Mendoza says. There is a symbiosis between photographer and subject. Together they build what Mendoza calls the “Hollywood hype machine.” Be personable with celebrities. Converse. Make a joke. “Ask them, What did you have for breakfast today?” Mendoza says. “Show them, Hey, I know you're a human, too.”

