In the three years she lived in Philadelphia, Jessica Poole occupied four apartments.
Possibly, she said, her discontent with her apartments reflected her feelings about Philadelphia. The Center City area seemed small to her, without much to do or see.
She was eager to return to New York, where she had lived and worked before she got a job in Philadelphia. “I like change,” Ms. Poole said. “In New York, you never have to do the same thing twice if you don’t want to.”
Ms. Poole, 32, grew up in Palo Alto, Calif., and graduated in 2005 from Boston University. Last winter, she landed a new job in Midtown, which took her back to New York. As the senior allocator for a fashion retailer, she is in charge of inventory management.
She wanted a sunny apartment on the top floor of a walk-up building with prewar charm. “I am willing to climb the mountain to see the view,” she said.
For help, she contacted a friend, Eric Cruz, a salesman at Citi Habitats. “She was the first client who actually requested a fifth- or sixth-floor walk-up,” he said. “Most people do not want to go past the third floor.”
In her previous New York sojourn, she had lived primarily in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn. She felt she hadn’t spent enough time in Manhattan. So this time, she wanted to try the West Village or SoHo. Her budget for a studio was up to $2,300 a month, which she soon boosted to $2,500.
“I prefer cozy spaces,” Ms. Poole said. As long as her big pieces of furniture could fit, “I didn’t care how small it was.”
The first place that interested her was a top-floor studio on Sullivan Street in SoHo. It rented for $2,400 a month, but Mr. Cruz negotiated the rent to $2,350.
Ms. Poole returned to measure, however, and found that the configuration of windows, closets, radiator and decorative fireplace militated against her furniture. She has a large vintage trunk and an antique brass clothing rack that’s seven feet long. “I just love that thing,” she said. “Everybody who helps me move hates that thing.”
On Perry Street in the West Village, she liked a $2,200-a-month studio with an appealing sunken living room, also on the top floor. Unfortunately, it had an interior view.
Within days, another studio became available on the same floor, this one with a street view. Mr. Cruz sent her a video of the place. The rent was $2,175 a month. She immediately submitted her paperwork, but by the next morning the apartment was gone.
A one-bedroom corner apartment, on the top floor of a six-story building on Avenue of the Americas in SoHo, had roof access and a great view. But Ms. Poole found it free of both charm and character. That one was $2,450 a month.
Nothing seemed right. Some places were too contemporary or bland for her taste. Sometimes the view, while sufficiently sunny, was of a backyard or a garage.
After more than two weeks of hunting, Ms. Poole decided to give Brooklyn another try. She liked Fort Greene, finding it picturesque and conveniently located. Her job would be in Midtown, and it would not be difficult to do things in Manhattan after work and on weekends.
She and Mr. Cruz visited a studio with a small separate galley kitchen, for $1,700 a month, on the top and fifth floor of a small walk-up.
It was after dark. Ms. Poole made a beeline for a window. It was difficult to see at night, and the weather was foggy. So she and Mr. Cruz returned the next morning. In the sunshine, “it was an immediate yes,” she said.
The apartment was just above the view break — one story higher than the buildings across the street, affording a great view of rooftops close by and of Manhattan beyond. The bathroom had a skylight, “another plus of being on the top floor,” she said. The comparatively low rent was “the cherry on top.”
Ms. Poole paid the broker fee of 15 percent of a year’s rent, or $3,060, and arrived late in the winter.
She knew her place would be quiet, with no one traipsing past her door and nobody living above her.
Ms. Poole’s movers charged a higher rate for her high floor, “but it was money well spent,” she said.
Once her furniture was in place, she discovered the floors were slanted. She leveled the bed by adding risers to two of the legs. She enjoys such quirks. “It doesn’t feel like a cookie-cutter apartment,” she said.
The studio has just one small closet, however. “I work in fashion and have a ton of clothes,” Ms. Poole said. She removed the closet rod to make room for more shelves, and of course employs her long antique rack. Her trunk, also used for storage, doubles as a television stand.
She rarely uses her tiny kitchen. The refrigerator was in the main room, “consuming prime square footage,” she said, but the landlord agreed to remove it. She recently replaced it with a new mini-fridge, which fits neatly in the kitchen and is topped with a toaster oven.
“It is surprising how long you can go without needing a fridge or even a kitchen,” she said. She usually grabs food on her way home from work, or dines with friends.
When her friends visit, her top-floor location “doesn’t sound that bad to them until they start walking up,” she said. “Nobody seems to mind until they get to the third floor.”
Guests sometimes ask how she deals with carrying groceries. “I don’t really grocery shop,” she said. “I just get small amounts and I go often. That is one of the beauties of living in New York.”
It’s only toting her laundry upstairs that’s a nuisance, but, she said, “you do it on a day when you’re not wearing heels.”

