WASHINGTON — The comedian Bob Saget, best known for “Full House” and “America’s Funniest Home Videos,” began his stand-up set on Thursday by cautioning the parents with children in the room to get them out of there immediately. The night’s show would be crude and rude, he said, and “everything will be offensive.” But he wasn’t at a dimly lit comedy club or even a place that checks IDs at the door. He was onstage in the grand Concert Hall of the John F. Kennedy Center — home to some of the nation’s premier artistic performances, and, now, a no-holds-barred comedy series, the District of Comedy Festival.
“Some of you may say, ‘Well, is it appropriate to have a roast in the Kennedy Center?’” David M. Rubenstein, the center’s chairman, said before introducing Mr. Saget, who led a roast of the Democratic strategist James Carville. “Well, the answer is, President Kennedy pretty much invented humor — self-deprecating humor. Tonight you won’t hear any self-deprecating humor; you’ll hear a lot of deprecating humor.”
The roast, which also included the comedians Jeff Ross, Jim Norton and Hari Kondabolu as well as Mr. Carville’s wife, Mary Matalin, was one of this inaugural festival’s headlining events. The roasters knocked back glasses of Maker’s Mark on brown leather sofas in front of a roaring audience, tossing insults, good-natured middle fingers and embarrassing personal stories Mr. Carville’s way.
The former co-host of CNN’s “Crossfire,” Mr. Carville is known for his relationship with the Clintons — a point that earned him playful scorn throughout the evening.
“James, come on, don’t you miss the action of working on a Clinton campaign?” Triumph the Insult Comic Dog, who routinely mocks politicians, asked. “Don’t you just want to roll up your sleeves and get in there and delete some emails yourself?”
The roast and the other headlining event, a tribute to Joan Rivers, exemplify the Kennedy Center’s goal of expanding its portfolio to include art forms it hasn’t typically showcased. This year the rapper Q-Tip was installed as its first hip-hop director, and the naming this week of Mavis Staples as a Kennedy Center honoree makes her only the second gospel artist to receive that distinction, after Marion Williams in 1993.
Though the four-day festival concludes Saturday, the center will feature other comedy acts as part of its current season.
At the Rivers tribute on Wednesday night, which included Aubrey Plaza of “Parks and Recreation,” Gilbert Gottfried, Dick Cavett and RuPaul, Kelly Osbourne asked the audience to recite Ms. Rivers’s favorite word while making a V-shape with their arms. “Vagina!” the audience cheered back.
The festival also features Jane Lynch of “Glee”; a jazz and comedy mash-up with Dick Gregory; stand-up shows by Judd Apatow, Jay Pharoah and “The Daily Show” writers; and live recordings of popular comedy podcasts.

