General Manager Sandy Alderson watches Mets games the way most fans do, filled with exhilaration when his team wins and frustration when it loses. But as the Mets face a familiar crossroad in their season — five games above .500 after Tuesday’s 2-1 win over the Kansas City Royals — Alderson is juggling more than emotions.
The lineup has been the biggest drag on the team, and the front office is weighing all options for upgrades to an offense that ranks near the bottom of baseball in several categories. While the Mets welcomed back catcher Travis d’Arnaud, they will hold a workout for the Cuban defector Yulieski Gourriel, keep an eye on the former Met Jose Reyes, and take a look at which prospects might be promoted or demoted.
“If you look at the team as a whole, there aren’t a lot of places where a significant upgrade is possible,” Alderson said before the game Tuesday. “But we’re always looking. Time is against us a little bit in the sense that we’re not that close to the trade deadline.”
The Mets have already made minor tweaks to their roster — first baseman James Loney and the utility man Kelly Johnson were recently added — but deals for frontline players are not likely until closer to the Aug. 1 trade deadline. Through 69 games last season, the Mets had a 36-33 record, but July trades sparked a second-half turnaround.
“That doesn’t happen very often, where a team just catches fire at the deadline and most of the deals work,” Alderson said. “That’s not historically true. So in that sense, waiting until the deadline isn’t necessarily a great strategy.”
The Mets must also ask themselves: Will one significant addition make much difference? Kevin Plawecki was sent to Class AAA Las Vegas to make room for the better-hitting d’Arnaud, who had been out since late April because of a rotator-cuff injury in his throwing shoulder. Third baseman David Wright (neck) and first baseman Lucas Duda (back) remain on the disabled list.
“There are only a few things that really we can do to change the team profile, and that’s kind of at the margins,” Alderson said. “In that sense, focusing on one or two players is inappropriate. Right now, it’s a team outage, and we need to figure out how to correct that as opposed to rearranging deck chairs.”
Alderson admitted that the Mets had considered swapping the struggling outfielder Michael Conforto with the outfield prospect Brandon Nimmo, but they are keeping Conforto for now.
“I didn’t want to show a huge panic and all of a sudden just starting flipping guys out and start bringing three or four guys up and sending guys out,” Manager Terry Collins said. “Because I’m not sure that’s the way to keep things calm.”
The Mets’ list of injured grew Tuesday. Reliever Jim Henderson was placed on the disabled list with right biceps tendinitis. Returning from Tommy John surgery in the minor leagues, starter Zack Wheeler was shut down with elbow discomfort and will see Mets doctors Wednesday in New York.
Starter Bartolo Colon left after four pitches when a ground ball off Whit Merrifield’s bat hit Colon’s right thumb. The injury initially looked bad, but the Mets announced that Colon’s X-ray results were negative.
“When the ball hit me, I prayed to God that my finger wasn’t broken,” Colon said.
Collins said the Mets would re-evaluate Colon’s swollen thumb Thursday. Colon said he had no issue gripping a ball after the game.
The Mets’ all-or-nothing offense provided the needed support in solo home runs by Asdrubal Cabrera and Yoenis Cespedes. In Colon’s place, the bullpen cobbled together the next 26 outs with five relievers, led by Hansel Robles, who threw 65 pitches in a career-high three and two-thirds innings.
“I was a little tired but not exhausted,” Robles said.
For now, the Mets will explore outside options for their lineup like Gourriel, 32, who can play second or third base and is a career .335 hitter in Cuba and Japan. He was once considered Cuba’s top prospect but defected in February. He has not played professionally in months and may command a sizable financial commitment.
Alderson said the Mets would do “due diligence” on Gourriel.
“It’s not clear how long a player in that situation would take to be ready,” Alderson said. “And of course there’s the investment and all the other issues and making an evaluation based on workouts primarily and not game competition.”
The Mets may also consider Reyes, a former homegrown star shortstop who was designated for assignment by the Colorado Rockies last week. If unclaimed on waivers or untraded by this weekend, Reyes will be a free agent.
Reyes could be signed for the prorated major league minimum. But his diminished skills aside, his off-the-field issues could scare teams away. Although domestic abuse charges were dropped, Reyes served a 51-game suspension issued by Major League Baseball stemming from an off-season episode with his wife.
Alderson said the Mets balanced their evaluations of talent with those of character.
“Those are things that we don’t ignore and are always taken into account when we make a player acquisition or decision,” he said.

