ARLINGTON, Tex. — An eight-foot wall in center field is like an eight-foot rim on a basketball court. Any aspiring pro with a sense of adventure will leap into a highlight for fun.
The real professionals, though? Most of them can dunk already, and most would not bother to practice the rare home run robbery. If they did, they would not do so in the blast furnace of Globe Life Park on a searing Texas afternoon.
Ian Desmond has done just about everything for the surging Texas Rangers, who have the American League's best record at 47-26. He is hitting .316 with 12 homers, 47 R.B.I. and 13 steals, but he has not yet pulled back a homer. So on Tuesday, hours before the first pitch, Desmond camped under the broiling sun and worked on the art of the steal: which foot to use to propel his jump, when to grab the wall, when to turn his head, when to reach.
“That, to me, is the beauty of him,” said Jayce Tingler, the Rangers' outfield coach, who tossed balls over the fence for Desmond. “He's always wanting to grow, always wanting to experiment. That's why I think he's transitioned so well. He's not afraid to fail.”
Desmond played more than 900 games at shortstop for the Washington Nationals, winning three Silver Slugger awards in six full seasons and making an All-Star team. He turned down a $15.8 million qualifying offer from the Nationals last fall, started spring training without a job and gave up shortstop to sign with Texas on Feb. 29 for one year and $8 million.
The shortstop is the captain of the infield, a position many players hate to leave. Derek Jeter refused to yield for even one defensive game; it was part of his identity. Not so for Desmond, who grew up in Sarasota, Fla., and was raised on TBS broadcasts of the Atlanta Braves. He did not yearn to be the next Jeff Blauser.
“Andruw Jones — that was who I always wanted to be,” Desmond said. “I heard of him playing shortstop and then turning into a center fielder. The way that he impacted the game — he did things in center that nobody else could do and made it look really easy. That was something I always strived for.”
Desmond played all over the field until 2004, his senior year in high school, when he settled in at shortstop and was drafted in the third round by the Montreal Expos. The franchise moved to Washington the next season, and Desmond reached the majors in 2009.
He said he was proud of his years at shortstop, but maybe, he added, he could have been better had the outfield not tugged at him. Desmond knew he could play there, too, and so did other teams. For years, the Rangers' scouts had included that opinion in their reports on him.
It seemed likely, though, that Desmond, 30, would stay in Washington for years. He grew with the franchise, helping lift it from doormat to division winner, and was widely hailed for his professionalism. In 2014, he got a five-year, $89.5 million contract extension offer.
Desmond turned it down. The deal would have been below market for a shortstop, considering that Elvis Andrus — his current Rangers teammate and a lesser offensive player — had a $120 million guarantee. The sides could not agree, and Desmond's 2015 season was a colossal flop: a career-low batting average (.233) and on-base percentage (.290), with a career-high 187 strikeouts and a National League-worst 27 errors.
“I was driving home one night last year, it was going bad, and I felt like I just needed to call somebody,” said Desmond, who sought a veteran teammate. “I had about a 25-minute drive, and I called Dan Uggla. He was a good dude to me. I said, ‘Man, I don't know how much more of this I can take, you know?' And he said: ‘You can take as much as you want. You can handle it. It's never going to be too much for you. Just keep on going.' ”
Desmond thought about it and decided Uggla was right. He would immerse himself in the grind and not dread the thought of it. He improved in the second half, but still received tepid interest on the market. The Rangers backed away early over price, but by late February they could not pass up the bargain.
By then, Desmond had declined staggering sums he has not yet matched. He did not want to revisit those choices, saying simply that he was happy and grateful to be with a winning team. Rangers General Manager Jon Daniels said Desmond has stayed in the moment.
“Very genuine — no pretense, no nonsense, extremely intense,” Daniels said. “I think there are people — it's human nature — that might be affected by the money, what could have happened, decisions. I don't think he thinks about it at all. He's extremely confident, extremely proud.”
From their first conversation, Manager Jeff Banister said, Desmond emphasized that his only goal was to help the team. His individual aim, he told Banister, was wrapped in that pursuit: He wanted to win a Gold Glove in the outfield.
Desmond typically worked three sessions each day in spring training: early drills, regular practice and late afternoons with the minor leaguers. Daniels heard comparisons to infielders who had made lackluster transitions to the outfield, like Hanley Ramirez and Alfonso Soriano. The only name Daniels heard Desmond mention was Alex Gordon, the former Kansas City third baseman who became a Gold Glover in left field.
Tingler liked the idea of using Desmond in left because he would have the same view as he had had at shortstop, with more time to react. But when Delino DeShields struggled in center field, Desmond shifted there. He has played nowhere else since mid-May and is hitting .363 in June.
“He's always had the talent — he always put up good years, good months — but now he's really put it all together,” said the Rangers' Cole Hamels, who faced Desmond often in the N.L. and is now the ace of an injury-scarred rotation. “I think, ultimately, when you're happy, that helps, too. You can tell that he's happy being here, and he's at a good place in his life.”
Desmond is eligible for free agency again this winter, and Daniels said he wanted to keep him with the Rangers. Daniels added that he had spoken casually with Desmond's agent about the fit, but there have been no negotiations.
Desmond could again receive a qualifying offer, which ties a player to draft-pick compensation. He offered no opinion on how the rule could be changed in the collective bargaining agreement, which expires after this season, but it clearly depressed his market last year.
Others will decide on the rule, Desmond said, and he would accept any system they devise. He concerns himself only with the Rangers, he insisted, and his unlikely path to center field in Arlington somehow makes perfect sense.
“I don't think it could be any more clear that I'm where I'm supposed to be,” Desmond said. “And I'm grateful for that, extremely grateful for that, because I'm having the time of my life, the time of my career. It's just awesome. It's amazing how things worked out.”

