WASHINGTON — Commuters here who rely on the Metro are facing delays, early closings, single-tracking and station shutdowns during the second phase of a yearlong repair project. But that is not the only impact of the repairs: increased traffic from those who are suddenly forced to drive has clogged downtown streets and traffic in nearby Virginia and Maryland, aggravating drivers who have to endure far longer commutes.
“It doesn't take a large mathematical increase in drivers to tip the scales,” said Dave Dildine, a traffic reporter at the radio station WTOP, who has seen an increase in road congestion since renovations on the Metro began on June 4.
Rich Hershman, 46, who drives downtown every day from Alexandria, Va., said recently that his commute sometimes took up to an hour longer, depending on the day. “Every Metro surge has made traffic awful,” he said, referring to repairs. “It's always hit or miss, and afternoons have been a lot worse.”
Downtown parking garages are also noticing. At Colonial Parking near the White House, Ronnie Walker, a valet, said that he would have to start turning away people soon and that he expected traffic to get worse as the repairs continued.
“We only have so much room,” he said.
That is not what drivers, who can take a half-hour to crawl three blocks during rush hours, want to hear. Summer traffic is usually easier to navigate as schools have closed and workers take vacations.
The scheduled maintenance is part of a plan by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority to repair decades' worth of infrastructure deterioration on a system that serves the second-largest number of passengers in the nation.
A train crash in 2009 killed nine people, and commuters have dealt with water seepage, broken escalators and frequent fires, including one in 2015 that resulted in the death of a passenger. On Tuesday evening, the Cleveland Park stop in Northwest Washington was shut down after a flash flood poured inches of rain into the station and caused escalators to fail.
On the first day of the maintenance project, morning commuters took four times longer to drive into Washington on I-66 in Virginia, according to research from the Center for Advanced Transportation Technology Laboratory at the University of Maryland. It took almost five times longer the next morning.
Taran Hutchinson, a facilitator at the Metropolitan Area Transportation Operations Coordination Program at the University of Maryland, said he expected roads to be highly congested for the first few days of every phase of repairs.
“And as the week unfolds, more people will find alternative routes — other roads, other ways to their offices — and we'll see everyone find a new normal,” Mr. Hutchinson said.
The plan is to accelerate three years' worth of repairs into a single year and modernize the system to a point where it can handle routine maintenance.
The first phase lasted 13 days and affected the Metro system in Arlington, Va., west of Washington. The next phase, which began on Saturday and is to last 16 days, shut down tracks and stations in Southeast Washington that serve as entryways for commuters from Maryland. Future work will affect lines in other parts of the region.
Saureena Townsend, 22, said she would have to leave her home near the Largo Town Center station in Maryland two hours early to get to her job in Virginia. Ms. Townsend has been using Metro for five years and is used to regular delays and station shutdowns.
“A lot of people are numb to it by now,” she said. “I have been seeing that a lot more people are frustrated lately. For me, I just prepare and try not to stress out over something that is out of our control.”
Employees of the transit authority, in fluorescent yellow or purple vests, have been assigned to herd crowds of commuters to the proper track or shuttle. Some hand out pamphlets about the scheduled repairs.
Sarah Muir, 33, has the schedule pinned to her wall at home. She said that she and her husband have warned their employers that the Metro might make them late.
Others have sought to profit from the chaos. At a shuttle stop near the closed Benning Road station on Monday, a small white bus pulled up to a crowd of about 30 people huddled under the shade of a tree waiting for a ride. As transportation employees tried to answer questions and clear up confusion, a man walked out of the bus with a sign made of drywall and spray paint that read “L'Enfant Plaza.”
“No stops, straight there,” he said. “Five dollars.”
A worker for the transit authority called the man crazy, but three commuters took him up on the offer.

