PARIS — Taylor Townsend was in the passenger seat of a rental car headed to a satellite tennis tournament in Dothan, Ala., when the driver of the car, her coach, suddenly told her to grab the steering wheel.
Kamau Murray, the charismatic tennis teacher who was only 33 on that day in 2014, suddenly lost all feeling on the left side of his body. It drained out from his face to his toes, as he urgently informed his protégé.
Townsend, who turned 18 that week, was terrified and had no idea what was happening. But Murray, a sales representative for a pharmaceutical company, quickly guessed he was having a stroke, and had Townsend call 911.
“It was the most scary moment of my entire life,” Townsend said.
As Murray was loaded into an ambulance, he instructed Townsend to play that day, because that is one of many lessons Murray preaches to his charges.
Regardless of the adversity that may arise — a freakishly hot opponent, windy conditions or a coach strapped to a stretcher — you accept the challenge, play through it and expect success. (Townsend said she was far too worried, and she withdrew from the tournament).
Now fully recovered and as irrepressible as ever, Murray is instilling those lessons to another young American woman, the 23-year-old Sloane Stephens, who hired him last fall with the goal of pushing her career to new heights.
Stephens has one of the more interesting young coaches in tennis, according to Billie Jean King, a friend of and adviser to Murray.
“Kamau is really smart and he is going to be great for Sloane,” King said. “She is very talented physically, but emotionally she gets challenged, and that’s where he can really help. She can do it, and she is trying. I think hiring Kamau shows she is serious about it.”
Stephens knew Murray from her time playing doubles with Townsend, who last year switched coaches to Donald Young Sr. Stephens had won her first tour title in Washington last summer with the help of Thomas Hogstedt. But she thought Murray’s positive and direct approach, along with his uncompromising energy, would be helpful.
“He’s helped me to believe in myself and trust in my ability, that I can go out and do a lot of things great,” Stephens said during the French Open in May. “He’s helped me to use what I have.”
Since Murray began traveling with Stephens in January, they built on her Washington success, scoring victories in Auckland, Acapulco and Charleston, the best run of her career. She was ranked No. 37 at the end of 2014 and is now 20th heading into Wimbledon, which begins Monday.
At Roland Garros, there was disappointment after a third-round loss to Tsvetana Pironkova in the third round, but for Murray, it was another moment to reinforce the lesson of accepting challenges.
“Sometimes the opponent is going to be playing great,” he said. “Pironkova beat Agnieszka Radwanska right after Sloane, so she was playing well. But that kind of challenge is always going to be there.”
When Stephens is playing, Murray usually sits courtside, a calming influence quietly reassuring his player when those challenges surface. But most of his work is done before the matches, and that includes watching hours of video of Stephens’s opponents, which are not provided by any scouting services.
“I get them off YouTube,” he said. “You can find hours of stuff.”
A gifted all-around athlete who claims to have some basketball skills to go with his tennis game, Murray played tennis at Florida A&M. That was followed by 10 years in pharmaceutical sales, where he learned the value of strategic planning.
“Everything gets planned out and written down,” he said.
That applies to coaching, too. Before each match, Murray provides Stephens with a concise, bullet-point tactical game plan, which he texts to her phone. It might stress hitting to an opponent’s weak backhand, or standing closer to the baseline.
But as devoted as Murray is to Stephens, he has other work that compels him, too. He founded and runs XS Tennis and Education Foundation, a youth tennis center on the South Side of Chicago, near where he grew up. One of its primary missions is to help players acquire college scholarships through tennis. His work with children of various skill levels and financial backgrounds, he said, has honed his message for professionals.
“I learned to coach at this level by dealing with hundreds of kids, hundreds of different personalities,” he said.
The center is Murray’s baby, and even on the road he spends hours poring over reports, formulating strategy and watching video of the lessons. During the French Open, Murray would leave the grounds after his debriefing with Stephens, eat dinner with her and her family, then retire to his hotel room to work on his foundation.
Because of that commitment, Murray said, he will only coach professional players — just Townsend and Stephens, to date — if he truly cares for them.
He took on Townsend, who also grew up in the South Side of Chicago, when she turned pro after a stellar junior career.
Stephens joined that small community last fall, during the United States Open. Murray brought a group of 40 of his students to New York to meet with corporate leaders and tennis officials in Manhattan and to attend the tournament and clinics. Murray, who at that point was not yet coaching Stephens, asked her to meet with the children. She immediately invited them to her Midtown hotel, where the star-struck children snapped photos, got autographs and generally palled around with a rising tennis star.
“When I saw that, I thought, ‘I could work with that person,’ ” Murray said.
Murray pulled out his phone and called up a series of photographs showing Stephens at his facility in Chicago, working with the children. He said she had finished her own workout, but instead of going right home, she stayed to help, and seemed to genuinely enjoy it.
“I love those kids,” Stephens said, her face brightening at the topic. “Kids are my favorite thing in the world.”
As with his students, Murray tries to take a comprehensive approach with Stephens, preaching about more than just on-court tactics and conditioning. Growing up in Chicago, Murray’s best friend was (and remains) Quentin Richardson, the former N.B.A. player for 13 years and the former director of player development of the Detroit Pistons.
When Richardson was playing for the Los Angeles Clippers, the Phoenix Suns and especially the Knicks, Murray would visit for days at a time and absorb everything he saw. What impressed him the most — besides Nate Robinson’s uncanny Ping-Pong skills — was the connection between preparation, lifestyle and success.
He saw how serious professionals like Richardson took their pregame naps at specific times, had chefs cook specially designed meals, followed detailed workout routines, and also found proper moments for recreation.
“I want to connect the dots for Sloane,” Murray said. “Everything is related, and everything matters. In the N.B.A., everything is structured until May, and then it’s, ‘Hey, get me to Miami.’ In tennis, it’s more year round.”
That can take a toll on a coach, too, especially one whose body sent him an indisputable warning sign two years ago. That frightening episode turned out to be a transient ischemic attack, also known as a mini-stroke. An attack usually causes no permanent damage, but can be an indication of risk for a future stroke.
Murray quickly regained all feeling and spent a week in hospitals in Dothan, Atlanta and Chicago. He was back on court soon afterward. He said he had experienced no further trouble, and mention of a stroke today mostly makes him think of forehands and backhands.
He has made some concessions, mainly altering his diet. Quitting his pharmaceutical sales job in January also freed up well over 40 hours a week.
But with the all-important fund-raising for his program, teaching and mentoring young people, coaching Stephens and attending to his wife and two children, Murray still must manage his time.
“The key is to bring the worlds together,” he said. “When Sloane comes to Chicago to train, she engages with the kids. I wish I had had a top 25 player chiming in on my lessons when I was a kid.”

