Sure, “Hamilton” may have a Pulitzer Prize, 11 Tony Awards and an international following. But does it have two Upper West Siders of a certain age kvetching for an audience’s entertainment and pranking celebrity guests with inordinate amounts of tuna fish?
There’s only one show (presumably) that will be able to boast those qualifications next season, and that’s “Oh, Hello on Broadway,” which will bring those humorous kibitzers Gil Faizon and George St. Geegland — actually the aged alter egos of the comedians Nick Kroll and John Mulaney — to the Lyceum Theater for a limited run this fall.
Mr. Kroll (of TV’s “Kroll Show” and “The League”) and Mr. Mulaney (“Saturday Night Live”), who have been playing Gil and George in live shows since the mid-2000s, were expected to announce the Broadway run of “Oh, Hello” on Sunday night.
The comedians said in a telephone interview that the aspiration to bring these adenoidal, self-deluded characters to Broadway arose only in the last couple of years and never appeared to be totally plausible.
“It seemed like the perfect, most ridiculous thing to happen,” Mr. Kroll said, adding, “The only two people who were sure that they should be on Broadway were George and Gil.”
But step by step they built their path, starting with appearances in 2015 at the 92nd Street Y and the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville, followed by the Off Broadway presentation of “Oh, Hello” at the Cherry Lane Theater, where it had a sold-out run later that year.
Reviewing that production for The New York Times, Ben Brantley wrote that “these sour, crotchety guys are best savored in large doses.”
“Mr. Kroll and Mr. Mulaney don’t so much portray Gil and George as allow themselves to be taken over by them, as if by dybbuks,” he wrote.
A national tour followed, during which its stars continued to tinker with the show, which loosely follows the crisis that Gil and George face when they lose the rent-controlled status on their apartment.
Mr. Mulaney and Mr. Kroll were coy about exactly what has been changed or updated in the show.
“To the annoyance of George and Gil, they’ve learned their lines and they don’t want to learn new lines,” Mr. Kroll said.
Mr. Mulaney said: “They locked the show in 1989. We’re begging them to update the references.”
Mr. Kroll added: “Their main request is showgirls. And we haven’t quite figured out how to tell them that the union has made it clear that they will not provide any showgirls for a George and Gil production.”
“Oh, Hello on Broadway” will begin performances at the Lyceum on Sept. 23, the show’s press representatives said. Its opening night is planned for Oct. 10 and its limited run is scheduled to conclude after Jan. 8.
Alex Timbers (“Peter and the Starcatcher,” “Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson”), who served as a creative consultant for the Off Broadway show, will be the director of the Broadway production. The fact that Mr. Timbers is also directing a Broadway adaptation of “Frozen,” the Disney musical, was of particular delight to Mr. Mulaney and Mr. Kroll.
“It would be like if you had two movies opening, and they were, like, ‘The Godfather’ and a snuff film,” Mr. Mulaney said.
What won’t change about “Oh, Hello,” they said, was its “Too Much Tuna” segment, in which audience members and celebrities (including past guests like Bill Hader and Marcia Clark) are brought onstage and given enormous quantities of tuna fish.
As they prepare for Broadway, Mr. Mulaney said, “There are whole conference calls where tuna is discussed, in serious tones, with award-winning set designers and prop masters and stage managers. And that’s one of the greatest joys.”

