When Glasslands Gallery, the influential independent club on the Williamsburg waterfront in Brooklyn, closed at the end of 2014, its owners had already been thinking about what was next.
The partners — Rami Haykal, 28, and Jake Rosenthal, 29 — had booked shows and worked at the ragtag D.I.Y. space since college, taking over the lease in 2011. Along with their friend Dhruv Chopra, 29, who had advised at Glasslands, they were plotting an expansion to a larger room with the same grass-roots ethos when Glasslands fell victim to the Williamsburg real estate trends it helped catalyze: Vice Media, which outgrew the same punk spirit, took over the building.
So the young events entrepreneurs broadened their ambitions and embarked on a much more daring project: a new music and arts space measuring 24,000 square feet. It will include two performance rooms of different sizes, an art gallery, a loft bar and cafe with daytime service, and an open rooftop for D.J. sets and film screenings.
Dubbed Elsewhere — “It sounds like what we want the place to be: an alternative,” Mr. Rosenthal said of the name — the arts compound is in industrial Bushwick, deeper into Brooklyn on the L train, and is largely being built from the ground up in a converted warehouse at a cost of $3 million. (Its opening is planned for the fall.)
Such an undertaking, with its angel investors and adherence to building codes, may seem at odds with the do-it-yourself principles that pervade the world of semi-underground clubs in New York, known for their shaky floors and questionable legality. But those scrappy places are also fleeting, prone to sudden closure — the independent clubs Santos Party House and Palisades are the latest to fizzle — precisely the fate Elsewhere is preparing to avoid.
“Why did Glasslands disappear? Because a lot of the fundamentals of what it means to be a business in New York City weren't really planned,” Mr. Rosenthal said. “That's a good thing — it gave us the experience that we had there. But it's gone now, and there's a reason. We're trying to build a space that artists and audiences can enjoy for a longer period of time.”
Mr. Chopra, who has a background in investment management, added, “The whole scene is realizing that now: This city is just naturally forcing people to evolve if you want to be sustainable.”
With the New York events scene increasingly dominated by megaconcert promoters like Live Nation, the founders of Elsewhere are hoping to fill a local void as a spacious, professionally run indie venue, with plans to book a majority of shows there through their own production company, PopGun Presents.
This week, a construction crew was noisily at work on the still-skeletal building, pouring cement and transporting mounds of dirt and rocks amid exposed wires and laid-out blueprints. But the shape of the labyrinth-like complex was beginning to reveal itself as a potential playground for emerging artists across mediums and the parade of Brooklyn showgoers hoping to get sweaty and dance.
On a tour of the space, its owners enthusiastically pointed out the planned amenities that will separate Elsewhere from its D.I.Y. predecessors: industrial air conditioning, a sizable coat-check area, multiple bars — and plentiful bathrooms, a necessary corrective to the dispiriting toilet scene at Glasslands.
“Part of the mandate of the project is to try to keep the spirit but fix the problems and operational headaches,” Mr. Rosenthal said, adding that the owners are “thinking about simple ways to make it a better experience” and reducing “the little frustrations of being at a crowded music venue in New York City.”
Still, the look of the place will be minimal, the owners said, because they chose to invest more in “creative infrastructure” — lights, stages, sound systems, artist green rooms — than interior design.
Programming will be crucial. Glasslands was known for its early support of rising indie acts like Grimes, FKA twigs, Disclosure and Frankie Cosmos; Elsewhere hopes to expand its genre boundaries, embracing more hip-hop, folk, house and techno, its owners said.
Above all, they hope the new venue will be a reliable community gathering place for those invested in alternative culture — but in a more grown-up package.
“This place isn't going to fall apart,” Mr. Rosenthal said, recalling the “sense of chaos and impending doom” that came with running a space like Glasslands. “It's not necessarily that it needed to be bigger and have better finishing or nicer wallpaper. It's mostly that we wanted to set up a thing that could last.”
But the extra bathrooms don't hurt.

