ASHBURN, Va. — Amid the hooting and hollering at Washington Redskins minicamp, there is a different sound in the air during running back drills.
Coaches whack at the football while Matt Jones carries it, and it beeps. Then it beeps longer.
That is a good sign.
The Redskins are one of five N.F.L. teams using so-called beeping or whistling footballs to emphasize ball security. When the ball is being held correctly using the fundamental five points of pressure, it emits a beeping sound at about 80 decibels to tell a player he is doing it right.
“If I had that ball in high school, I don’t think I would have had a fumble,” Jones said. “It’s teaching me how to squeeze the ball at the point of contact. Everything has changed about me holding the ball.”
Cutting down on fumbles is the goal in using the ball, which was developed by Tom Creguer, an assistant coach at Northwood University. It has been used by the Redskins, the Dallas Cowboys, the Indianapolis Colts, the Baltimore Ravens, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and several college teams. The San Diego Chargers plan to start using them at training camp.
Creguer said practicing with “High and Tight” footballs, which cost about $150 each, reduced the Northwood team’s fumbles by 63 percent last season. Many N.F.L. position coaches learned of the balls at the scouting combine.
“It basically reinforces the proper hold by teaching the athlete to put their forearm to the panel, their panel to the chest and to compress the ball evenly with equal distribution of pressure, therefore creating basically a vise around the football, creating that muscle memory of what it feels like to have the ball secured to their body at all times,” Creguer said in a phone interview.
The technology adds a new element to how coaches teach ball security. Creguer said the Cowboys running backs coach Gary Brown had texted him to say that he would use the beeping footballs as long as he was working.
Cowboys players took a little more time to warm up to the balls.
“They didn’t like it at first,” Brown said. “I think it was just the pressure you had to do it. They’re not used to squeezing it that hard.”
Players are not the only ones adjusting to how to squeeze a football tight enough. During a presentation, the Ravens running backs coach Thomas Hammock demonstrated and then tossed the ball to Coach John Harbaugh, who could not get it to beep.
“I’ve been working out; I feel like I’m pretty strong right now,” Harbaugh said with a laugh. “Found out later the battery was dead, for the record.”
On the field, though, it seems to be working. Brown said the Cowboys running backs Ezekiel Elliott and Alfred Morris had fewer fumbles during organized team activities and minicamp after working with the beeping balls in drills.
Morris said he got a cramp in his forearm the first day, but he thought it would help in games when defenders were trying to strip the ball. With so much to think about, he wants holding the ball to be second nature.
“It’s easy to just, like, ‘I’ve got to make this guy miss.’ You don’t think about, ‘I need to keep the ball tight, too,’” Morris said. “So doing something like that can kind of reiterate like, hey, keep the ball tight.”
Colts running back Robert Turbin has only lost one fumble in 281 career carries but was open to new ideas about how to get better.
“All running backs fumble, but as they say, iron sharpens iron, so just because you’re good at something doesn’t mean you can’t get better at it,” Turbin said.
For the Redskins, it is about fixing a known problem. Jones lost four fumbles as a rookie, and with Morris’ having gone to Dallas, Jones must improve in that area as Washington’s top back.
The Redskins running backs coach Randy Jordan, who played nine seasons for the Raiders and the Jaguars, struggled to get the football to beep at first. After he and his players figured it out, Jordan noticed a major improvement, especially from Jones, who plans to buy a ball to use during the summer break.
Other running backs may soon follow suit.
“Ball security, that’s the most important thing on the field,” Morris said. “That’s one thing you don’t want to do is turn the ball over.”

