JERUSALEM — Israel and Turkey agreed on Sunday to resume full diplomatic relations, ending a bitter, six-year rift between the once-close regional allies, according to Israeli and Turkish officials.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel was scheduled to announce the deal in Rome on Monday, according to the Israeli official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity from Rome because the accord had not yet been formally made public. The Turkish government planned to make a parallel announcement in Ankara.
The two countries fell out after a deadly confrontation in 2010 between Israeli commandos and Turkish activists on a passenger vessel that tried to breach Israel’s naval blockade of the Gaza Strip, the Palestinian coastal territory that is under the control of Hamas, the Islamic militant group.
The ship, the Mavi Marmara, was part of a flotilla carrying aid to Gaza when Israeli naval commandos rappelled onto the ship’s deck and killed nine activists after being met with violent resistance. A 10th activist later died of his wounds.
Negotiating teams for the two countries met in Rome over the weekend.
Mr. Netanyahu left for Rome on Sunday, and was also scheduled to meet there with Secretary of State John Kerry and Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy. Mr. Netanyahu said those meetings would focus on regional matters, including relations with the Palestinians, as well as security and other concerns.
Reconciliation between Israel and Turkey, two important allies of the United States, has long been an American interest as Washington confronts civil war in Syria and broader instability in the region.
Turkey was once Israel’s closest friend in the Muslim world, and the two countries still share many strategic interests, including containing Iran.
Before leaving for Rome, Mr. Netanyahu responded to criticism from the families of two Israeli soldiers whose remains are being held by Hamas in Gaza, as well as relatives of one of two Israeli civilians being held captive by Hamas.
Turkey maintains close political ties with Hamas, and over the weekend President Recep Tayyip Erdogan met with Khaled Meshal, the exiled political chief of Hamas, in Istanbul, according to the official Anadolu Agency, which quoted presidential sources.
The families have demanded that any agreement with Turkey include the return of the captives as well as the remains of the soldiers.
Speaking at the start of his weekly cabinet meeting in Jerusalem on Sunday morning, Mr. Netanyahu said, “We are continuing our constant efforts, both open and in secret, to bring back to Israel Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin, may their memories be blessed, and also the two Israelis being held in Gaza.”
He was referring to two soldiers who were killed in the 2014 war in Gaza by name, and to Avera Mengistu, an Israeli Jew of Ethiopian descent, and another Israeli citizen from a Bedouin town in the Negev desert, who has not been officially named. Both civilians crossed into Gaza of their own accord, without authorization.
The Israeli official in Rome said Mr. Erdogan had agreed to a document separate from the main accord that would instruct the relevant Turkish agencies to help resolve the issue of the Israelis missing in Gaza.
Many of the terms of the deal between Israel and Turkey are similar to those announced in December, when officials said a preliminary understanding had been reached. Israel is to pay about $20 million into a compensation fund for the families of those killed on the Mavi Marmara. Turkey, in turn, is to drop criminal charges it had filed against Israeli officers.
Israel also expects the Turkish authorities to prevent Hamas operatives in Turkey from orchestrating attacks against Israel. According to the Turkish official, Turkey will be allowed to deliver humanitarian aid to Gaza and invest in infrastructure projects in Gaza and the West Bank.
Israel and Turkey will return ambassadors to each other’s capitals and will discuss building a pipeline to bring natural gas from Israel to Turkey.
Yuval Steinitz, Israel’s minister of national infrastructure, energy and water, said that Israel and Turkey had “an interest in preventing Syria from turning into an Iranian military base” and that Israel was not easing up on Hamas by reaching an agreement with Turkey.
“Certainly we are not conceding anything that is vital to our defense or security,” Mr. Steinitz told Israel Radio.
It has been more than three years since President Obama pressed Mr. Netanyahu to call Mr. Erdogan, then the prime minister of Turkey, to apologize for the Marmara episode. That telephone call, at the end of a 2013 visit by Mr. Obama to Israel, was supposed to clear the way for reconciliation, but there were many false starts as Israel and Turkey failed to agree on terms.

