After staging a successful expanded Copa América in the United States for the tournament's 100th anniversary, soccer officials intend to discuss whether to establish a new event that would see regular competition between the regions.
And the U.S. Soccer Federation hopes this year's tournament could be a springboard to hosting a World Cup for the second time.
“We hope it influences where the 2026 World Cup will be,” U.S. Soccer Federation President Sunil Gulati said Friday.
With only the final and the third-place game remaining, the 16-nation tournament has drawn 1.36 million fans, an average of 45,491. That's down from the 1994 World Cup in the United States, but nearly double the average crowd of last year's Copa América in Chile.
“These are World Cup numbers — World Cup numbers for an event organized in seven months with 16 teams,” Gulati said.
The Copa América, South America's championship, is played quadrennially a year after the World Cup and includes that federation's 10 nations and two invited teams. The Concacaf Gold Cup, the championship of North and Central America and the Caribbean, is a 12-nation tournament played in odd-numbered years.
This year's special Copa included 10 South American teams and six from Concacaf. The new Concacaf president, Victor Montagliani, said a new event could be scheduled for the even-numbered years between World Cups — when the European Championships is played — or the year before World Cups.
“Those are the two years that make sense,” he said. “Having said that, we still have to talk to FIFA. There's a few hurdles to jump over: European clubs, all that kind of stuff. So we'll see.”
Montagliani said Concacaf would have to scale back the Gold Cup to once every four years to create room on soccer's crowded calendar.
“We remain open to hearing any proposals and ideas,” said Alejandro Dominguez, the new president of Conmebol, South America's soccer federation. “It's very important to remain open-minded, and this has been a success.”

