An experiment in school leadership aimed at reviving the long-struggling Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn is coming to an end, the New York City Education Department said on Thursday.
Michael Wiltshire, who for two years simultaneously led that school and the selective Medgar Evers College Preparatory School, also in Brooklyn, will step down from his post at Boys and Girls on July 1.
His departure is a setback to the de Blasio administration’s effort to turn around the troubled school and seems a tacit acknowledgment that the experiment had not been successful.
In an unusual arrangement, the Education Department had appointed Dr. Wiltshire to lead Boys and Girls while also keeping his job at Medgar Evers, which he had built into a highly successful school.
Dr. Wiltshire presided over an improvement in Boys and Girls’ four-year graduation rate, to 50 percent last year from 41.9 percent in 2013-14. At the same time, enrollment at the school declined by roughly half, to 334 students, and he was accused of pushing out older students who had few credits. Dr. Wiltshire has said that enrollment did not decline as sharply as it seems, because when he arrived the register still included many students who had stopped attending. He has said that he did encourage some students to transfer, but that it was in their best interest because they had little chance of graduating.
Parents complained that Dr. Wiltshire was spending too little time at Boys and Girls, and his dual posts stirred further controversy when he proposed moving Medgar Evers into the Boys and Girls building, which some saw as a way to phase out Boys and Girls while handing its building and athletic fields over to Medgar Evers. The Education Department said this month that it would not pursue the proposal.
Dr. Wiltshire, who has faced several investigations in recent months by the Education Department, had said this month that he was considering leaving the schools for a job on Long Island.
The Education Department said on Thursday that the decision for Dr. Wiltshire to leave Boys and Girls had been mutual and that he would continue as principal of Medgar Evers. It said that Angelo Marra, the former principal of the International Arts Business School in Brooklyn, which closed last year because of poor performance, would lead Boys and Girls until a new principal was named.
A spokeswoman for the Education Department, Devora Kaye, said Dr. Wiltshire’s dual appointment “was a strategy that helped to stabilize Boys and Girls and put it on a path to improved outcomes, and this school has made significant progress — including an 8 percent increase in the graduation rate.” Dr. Wiltshire did not respond to an email seeking comment.

