A decision by the Supreme Court overturning its 2003 ruling in Grutter v. Bollinger and ending the ability of universities and colleges to consider race as one among several factors informing “holistic” admissions decisions would be far-reaching in its harm.
The experience in California over the last two decades is instructive. In 1997, the year before a statewide ban on affirmative action went into effect, the incoming classes of undergraduates at Berkeley and the University of California, Los Angeles, were both approximately 8 percent African-American. Last year, only 4.3 percent of U.C.L.A.’s incoming class was African-American and at Berkeley the percentage was just 2.8 percent. During this period, the percentage of black college-age residents in California remained unchanged. The impact of California’s ban, which was the result of a ballot initiative, is clear.
It is, therefore, an oddity of the debate over affirmative action that even as the status quo is challenged, few dispute the ways in which a variety of beliefs and perspectives yields better ideas than would emerge from a single vantage point. Without a truly diverse student body and faculty, a university simply will be unable to achieve the highest levels of excellence in teaching, research and intellectual discovery. And without the instrumental consideration of race in admissions currently allowed by the Supreme Court, that diversity will become an elusive goal for many universities and colleges.
As important as it is to preserve this holistic consideration of race, that goal is insufficient. I believe that the court and society must also come to grips with the fact that any discussion of the constitutionality of affirmative action necessarily forces us to consider a larger question: namely, whether one of America’s greatest engines of individual and communal advancement — our institutions of higher education — shall be enlisted in achieving a racially integrated society that transcends the nation’s legacy of slavery, Jim Crow and segregation.
For the better part of four decades, since Regents of the University of California v. Bakke was decided in 1978, this essential framework has been absent from the Supreme Court’s deliberations, replaced with a less discomforting conversation about the educational benefits of racial diversity and whether and how colleges and universities should be allowed to pursue those benefits. The remedy for this is to advocate for a broader, historically informed jurisprudence that harks back to the values and goals of Brown v. Board of Education, even while we insist on preserving the holistic consideration of race in admissions.

