SEOUL, South Korea — A day after North Korea launched an intermediate-range ballistic missile into high altitude — after five consecutive launch failures — the country's state-run media proclaimed the test a success on Thursday, and quoted Kim Jong-un, North Korea's leader, as boasting that his arsenal could strike United States forces in the Pacific.
The projectile took off from Wonsan, a port city east of Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, and flew about 250 miles over the sea between North Korea and Japan, South Korea's Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement.
According to the North's media reports, Mr. Kim attended the launch of the Hwasong-10 missile, known to the outside world as the Musudan. The reports included photographs of the blastoff from a mobile launch vehicle.
The test, confirmed and condemned by the United States and its allies, demonstrated that North Korea was making progress at posing a direct threat to Japan, South Korea and American troops in the Pacific. Mr. Kim said the test “marked an important occasion in further strengthening the nuclear attack capacity” of his country, according to the North's official Korean Central News Agency.
“We have the sure capability to attack, in an overall and practical way, the Americans in the Pacific operation theater,” Mr. Kim said, calling for his country to continue increasing its “pre-emptive nuclear attack capability.”
North Korea said that the missile accurately landed in targeted waters 250 miles away after reaching an altitude of 878 miles, and that it had fired the missile at a sharper angle to demonstrate its potential to reach the estimated full range of more than 2,000 miles — far enough to reach American military bases in the Pacific — without actually covering that distance. The high altitude also gave North Korea's engineers an opportunity to test the heat-resistance capability of their warhead, the country's media reports said.
The test was the first for the Musudan that was not immediately dismissed as a failure by the United States or South Korea.
Five Musudan tests over the past two months — including one earlier on Wednesday — all crashed into the sea or exploded soon after liftoff, according to South Korean military estimates.
Establishing that the missile can work is essential, both politically and strategically, to Mr. Kim. As he has solidified his hold on power, he has made the nuclear and missile programs — and the threat they pose to much larger powers in the region — a key element of his claim to rule.
Last month, American and South Korean intelligence officials said they had concluded that North Korea could now mount a small nuclear warhead on short- and medium-range missiles, a category that includes the Musudan. But Mr. Kim has never tested the two together, leaving it unclear whether his nuclear designs could withstand the stresses of delivering a weapon to its target.
The Musudan's progress has been followed closely by United States military and intelligence officials. It is a road-mobile missile, meaning it can move around the country, making it a harder target to hit in a pre-emptive strike. The Musudan is the North's only intermediate-range ballistic missile able to reach United States military bases in Guam, a major launching pad for American reinforcements should a war break out on the Korean Peninsula.
Analysts say the North has been struggling to master the so-called warhead re-entry technology needed to build longer-range projectiles known as intercontinental ballistic missiles.
The progress the North demonstrated with its sixth test was disconcerting enough for South Korea to convene a meeting of its top security officials to discuss the growing missile and nuclear threats. But such meetings rarely generate more than a promise to tighten sanctions.
Jeong Joon-hee, a spokesman for the South Korean government, called the launch a “clear provocation” that violated United Nations Security Council resolutions banning the North from developing ballistic missile technology.
Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, on her way to a Security Council session Thursday night to discuss the missile tests, called the latest launch “unacceptable.”
“It's worthy of Council unity, which I expect, and it's worthy of prompt condemnation,” she said.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan said the latest missile test was “a clear violation of United Nations resolutions.”
“We cannot tolerate it and have protested firmly,” he said.
The Japanese Defense Ministry said it believed the test showed that the North's missile technology was advancing.
South Korean analysts said that North Korea appeared to have launched the second missile at a sharper angle to achieve a higher altitude and prevent it from flying over Japan. They said such an altitude was required to test technology that protects a nuclear warhead from the extreme heat and friction encountered upon breaching the earth's atmosphere.
The North began testing the Musudan on April 15, after repeated calls by Mr. Kim for his military to conduct more nuclear and missile tests despite international sanctions. It has also repeatedly threatened nuclear strikes against the United States, saying that it has built nuclear weapons small enough to be mounted on its various ballistic missiles.
The country has successfully tested its short-range Scud and midrange Rodong missiles. The Rodong, with an estimated range of 810 miles, can reach all of South Korea and most of Japan.
The altitude reached on Wednesday was the highest achieved by any North Korean missile, and close to heights reached by intercontinental ballistic missiles, analysts said.
“The test appears to have been fully successful,” said Jeffrey Lewis, an analyst at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies in Monterey, California. He said that if North Korea had launched the missile on a normal trajectory, it would have flown the full range of about 2,480 miles.
Mr. Lewis said the development of the Musudan is especially worrisome because it also advances the North's KN-08 program — the development of its first intercontinental ballistic missile with a range to reach the continental United States. The first stage of the KN-08 missile comprises a pair of Musudan-type engines, he said.

