Long Island history is steeped in water, an element that surrounds the region, so the Parrish Art Museum as a host for “Radical Seafaring,” an exhibition on view through July 24 that takes on the historical, environmental, political and aesthetic aspects of our oceans, inlets, rivers and waterways, makes a lot of sense.
Presenting close to 50 works by some 25 artists or groups of artists, this exhibition of what the curator Andrea Grover calls global “offshore art” features models, photographs, audio recordings and videos that document water-focused projects, as well as drawings, sculptures and prints, some of which date to the 1960s and ’70s.
In the exhibition’s catalog, Terrie Sultan, director of the museum, notes that “since before the first European colonizers landed, water has been key to the history of the East End of Long Island.”
“Native communities who had long sought sustenance from the ocean,” Ms. Sultan continues, “soon found themselves competing with immigrant fishing industries as settlements grew in the 17th century.”
In the 19th century, she writes, the whaling industry dominated, and in the 20th, “prohibition inspired a brief but remunerative illicit bootlegging trade.” Now, of course, it’s all about tourism.
“Water,” Ms. Grover said, “is a place to disconnect from the modern world and experience firsthand the increasingly complex relationship between humans and the environment.”
With more and more discussion being devoted to climate change and rising sea levels, the works in “Radical Seafaring” are especially timely and provocative, she added.
Among the older works is Robert Smithson’s 1971 “Study for Floating Island to Travel Around Manhattan Island,” a park set on a barge and towed by a tugboat. The project wasn’t realized until 2005, 32 years after Mr. Smithson’s death, when it was tugged around the waterways of Manhattan; it is shown here in the 1971 drawing and 2005 video and photographs.
Another early work is the 1968 model by the architect Buckminster Fuller for Triton City, a floating city. Designed for Tokyo Bay and later revamped for Baltimore, the project was never realized.
An entire gallery is devoted to “In Search of the Miraculous,” an installation that explores a project undertaken by Bas Jan Ader, a Dutch conceptual artist, in 1975. Aiming to cross the North Atlantic in a 12½-foot sailboat, at the time the smallest craft to attempt a solo crossing, Mr. Ader set sail from Cape Cod in July 1975. His boat was recovered off the coast of Ireland after nine months. In 1978, Mr. Ader’s widow had him declared lost at sea. Before his departure, a choir recorded sea chanties in his Los Angeles studio. A slide show of their singing is on display here, as is sheet music for the chanties.
Many works have a more political bent, including Vik Muniz’s 2015 “Lampedusa,” a 45-foot boat made of waterproofed paper bound over a wooden framework, emulating origami boats. The paper on Mr. Muniz’s boat reproduced a newspaper detailing the drowning of hundreds of Libyan migrants off the Italian island of Lampedusa in 2013. Mr. Muniz launched his vessel — shown in a video at the museum — on the Adriatic during the 2015 Venice Biennale.
Also on view is the actual “Hickory” raft, which was constructed in Slovenia from reclaimed wood and discarded furniture by the artist Swoon (Caledonia Curry) and her crew. The floating wood pile was one of three rafts made from found objects to enter Venice’s lagoon as uninvited guests at the 2009 Biennale.
Duke Riley’s performance, “After the Battle of Brooklyn,” is represented by a photograph of him in his replica of the Turtle — a primitive, wooden submarine built by Americans to attack the British Navy during the Revolutionary War — as he tried to approach the cruise ship Queen Mary 2, docked in Brooklyn, in 2007.
Mark Dion’s “Cabinet of Marine Debris” is a precisely arranged array of plastic containers, fishing buoys, floats and ropes, collected on a 2013 expedition that studied Pacific Ocean marine debris, in a cabinet resembling a kitchen hutch.
Some of the most personal work in the exhibition is by local artists. Large ballpoint drawings by Scott Bluedorn show human and animal habitation on four islands in New York State: Gardiners, Gardiners Point, North Brother and Plum. Michael Combs — an 18th-generation descendant of immigrants on the second Mayflower who settled on Long Island — is represented here by “Daisy Chain,” a 2016 white-painted wood carving of horseshoe crabs. Courtney M. Leonard, a member of the Shinnecock Indian Nation who in 2014 sailed with scientists, historians and writers to historic New England ports aboard the last surviving, square-rigged whaling ship, has created an installation here called “Breach #2,” made of hollow, pearlescent, clay vessels shaped like sperm whale teeth, clustered on a large wooden pallet.
In an interview this month, Mr. Dion, speaking for himself and perhaps other artists in the exhibition, said he loved the idea behind the show. “There’s a new generation that’s motivated by a certain kind of environmental urgency of looking at the sea in a very different way,” he said.
“Maybe the sea is one of the last free zones. It’s an intensely under-regulated place for better and for worse, and it allows for a lot of kinds of freedom and rule-breaking. Rule-breaking is the bread and butter of artists.”

