“The Humans,” which recently won the Tony Award for best new play, will take the unusual step of changing theaters to extend its run.
The show's lead producer, Scott Rudin, said Thursday that the play would have a final performance at the Helen Hayes Theater on July 24, and then, after a two-week pause for the move, will resume performances at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater on Aug. 9. The move will be just one block, from West 44th Street to West 45th Street, but relocating shows is always complicated and costly.
The move is necessary because the new owner of the Helen Hayes Theater, the nonprofit Second Stage Theater, is planning on Aug. 1 to begin a 15-month renovation of the building, which it intends to use to present Broadway shows of its own starting in 2018. The $22 million renovation is being overseen by David Rockwell, who just won a Tony award for designing the set of “She Loves Me.”
Relocating Broadway shows is rare, but not unprecedented. “The Lion King” moved from the New Amsterdam to the Minskoff in 2006, and “Mamma Mia!” moved from the Winter Garden to the Broadhurst in 2013; location changes are rarer for plays, which tend to have significantly shorter runs than musicals, but it happened twice on a single day in 2008, when “August: Osage County” moved from the Imperial to the Music Box, and “The 39 Steps” went from the American Airlines to the Cort (that play then moved again, to the Helen Hayes, in 2009), and in 2015, “It's Only a Play” moved from the Schoenfeld to the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater.
“The Humans,” a family drama by Stephen Karam, won four Tony Awards on June 12. In addition to the prize for best new play, the show won awards for best featured actor in a play (Reed Birney), best featured actress in a play (Jayne Houdyshell) and best scenic design (David Zinn). The play premiered at the American Theater Company in Chicago in 2014; the current production began its life Off Broadway at the Roundabout Theater Company in 2015, and then transferred to Broadway in January, with the same set (replicating a rundown duplex apartment in Manhattan's Chinatown neighborhood) that will now relocate to the Schoenfeld.

