On fine afternoons in the mid-1970s and early ’80s, the photographer Al Vandenberg spent hours walking through London with his camera. After years in the music and advertising industries, he had become bored with feeding the egos of famous people — instead, he aimed to seek out anonymous subjects on the city streets. So he photographed everyone from rockabillies and teenagers in their customized school uniforms to shop workers and proto-punks, art students to so-called Sloane Rangers. Together, his images — many of them unpublished and unseen for decades — offer a rich portrait of the city’s interwoven subcultures.
Vandenberg, who was born in the U.S. to Dutch parents but raised by an English foster family in Boston, served in the Korean War from the age of 17. On his return he enrolled in art school in Boston and New York, before becoming an art director for the Doyle Dane Bernbach advertising agency — and taking photography classes under the guidance of Alexey Brodovitch and Richard Avedon. He moved to London in 1965, and immersed himself in the city’s music scene, working on the design of the Beatles’ “Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band” album with the artist Peter Blake. By the end of the 1960s, Vandenberg was traveling alongside hippie communities around the U.S. and Canada, living in squats and informal shelters. He settled again briefly in the early 1970s, taking portraits for album covers for United Artists, before moving back to London, and away from commercial photography for good, in 1974.
From young children in battered sneakers to rockers in bullet belts, Vandenberg’s subjects exude confidence and self-possession. He had a great eye for idiosyncratic style, too — be it a homemade knit worn under a canteen worker’s tabard or a DIY PVC top. While most of his subjects remain anonymous, a few have endured as definitive cultural figures. We see Lemmy, the hard-living frontman of the rock band Motörhead, standing outside a Notting Hill pub as a comparatively fresh-faced young man. Jordan, a star of London’s subculture whose fearless personal style came to define the female punk “look,” appears posed outside Vivienne Westwood and Malcolm McLaren’s Sex boutique on the King’s Road.
In 2006, the art dealer and collector Anthony Stokes, who had been a friend of Vandenberg’s since the 1970s, showed a box of Vandenberg’s photographs to Martin Barnes, the senior curator at London’s Victoria and Albert Museum. Barnes purchased a number for the permanent collection and exhibited them the following year. Before his death in 2012, Vandenberg himself visited the museum a number of times to see his work on display. He and Barnes discussed putting together a book of the London street photographs; it finally debuts this summer. “On a Good Day: Al Vandenberg” takes its title from the photographer’s simple formula for capturing a good shot. As he put it: “I photograph on a good day, when I feel good and the subject feels good.”

