The Knicks learned Tuesday that they would have more room under the rising salary cap with which to sign free agents when the N.B.A.’s most compelling transaction period begins July 1.
Arron Afflalo and Derrick Williams informed the Knicks that they would not exercise contract options for next season, according to a person in basketball who is involved in the situation. Both players, but particularly Williams, could sign new deals with the team.
With those anticipated opt-outs, the Knicks will have roughly $30 million to improve their roster with free-agent signings. With only seven players now signed for next season, they may have to scramble to fill out the bench, especially if they land one of the more desirable free agents, like point guard Mike Conley Jr., an unrestricted free agent who has played nine seasons for the Memphis Grizzlies.
Afflalo’s opt-out was expected after he was demoted from the starting lineup. The coaching staff was unhappy with his shot selection at shooting guard and with his defense. The option year would have paid Afflalo $8 million.
Williams, an athletic 6-foot-8 forward, had a fairly productive season off the bench, averaging 9.3 points and 3.7 rebounds per game. He would have made $5.1 million in 2016-17. Depending on how their free-agent pursuit goes, the Knicks could try to re-sign Williams, but with so many teams operating with cap space, the 25-year-old Williams figures to earn a good raise.
Among their unsigned players, the Knicks are known to be most interested in retaining Lance Thomas, a favorite of the team president, Phil Jackson. Thomas will also merit a raise from the $1.65 million he made last season.
The Knicks do not have a pick in the draft on Thursday night, although Jackson has indicated he is shopping to get one. Last year, he made two draft trades, swapping Tim Hardaway Jr. for point guard Jerian Grant, who was taken with the 19th pick in the first round out of Notre Dame.
In the second round, Jackson acquired the 35th pick from Philadelphia, Willy Hernangómez, a 6-10 Spaniard and a former teammate of Kristap Porzingis’s with Sevilla in Spain.
Jackson believes Hernangómez could be the equivalent of a late first-round draft pick and hopes he will join the Knicks next season. HARVEY ARATON
LYNX 72, SPARKS 69 A Renee Montgomery 3-pointer with 2.9 seconds left lifted the visiting Minnesota Lynx over the Los Angeles Sparks in a matchup of unbeaten W.N.B.A. teams.
A jaguar used in an Olympic torch relay ceremony was shot to death after it escaped its leash and tried to attack a soldier, the Brazilian army said.
The army press office said that the jaguar, named Juma, was on display as part of ceremonies Monday at the Jungle Warfare Instruction Center in Manaus.
The Olympic torch is traveling throughout Brazil leading up to the Aug. 5 opening ceremony.
“Juma was a docile animal used to living among people at the center,” the army said in a statement, adding that soon after the ceremonies, Juma escaped from his leash and fled into the zoo maintained by the center.
When the jaguar tried to attack a soldier sent to help recapture it, handlers shot the animal with tranquilizers. That failed to stop it, so Juma was shot in the head with a pistol.
“We were wrong to allow the Olympic torch, a symbol of peace and of the union among the peoples, to be displayed alongside a wild animal in chains,” the local Olympic organizing committee said on its Facebook page.
Corey Kluber threw a three-hitter, and the Cleveland Indians defeated the visiting Tampa Bay Rays, 6-0, for their fifth straight win.
Kluber allowed one hit before Brad Miller and Evan Longoria singled with one out in the ninth. Kluber retired the next two hitters for his third career shutout.
TEXAS TECH OUSTS FLORIDA Eric Gutierrez hit a two-run homer, Texas Tech picked up a huge insurance run by way of two errors on the same play in the ninth, and the Red Raiders eliminated Florida, 3-2, at the College World Series in Omaha. It was a stunning early exit for Florida, the No. 1 national seed.
The salary cap for the 2016-17 N.H.L. season will be $73 million, up from $71.4 million, the league and the players’ union announced.
The cap floor, or the minimum amount a team can spend, is $54 million. It was $52.8 million last season.
The draft begins Friday in Buffalo, and free agency opens July 1 at noon.
Belinda Bencic, the defending champion and the No. 3 seed, was beaten, 7-6 (4), 7-6 (5), in the second round of the Eastbourne International in England by Elena Vesnina, who won the tournament in 2013.
Agnieszka Radwanska, the top seed, advanced when Mirjana Lucic-Baroni retired with illness as Radwanska led, 6-4, 2-1, but second-seeded Roberta Vinci was also upset, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, by another former champion, Ekaterina Makarova.

