Open’Er Festival Various venues, June 29-July 2
The American rapper and music producer Pharrell, the Norwegian D.J. Kygo and the British singer-songwriter PJ Harvey are scheduled to appear in this festival of European dance music, American hip-hop and British rock. Some dance performances, theater pieces and art installations will also be on view. opener.pl
Istanbul Jazz Festival Various venues, June 27-July 25
The Blur frontman Damon Albarn will perform at the festival with the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians, a collective of around 50 musicians from the country. The ensemble, which is touring with Mr. Albarn, will perform pop music as well as music from Syria. Other performers in the lineup include the British singer Joss Stone; Ercument Orkut, from Turkey; and the jazz drummer Antonio Sanchez, from Mexico, who wrote the soundtrack to the movie “Birdman.” caz.iksv.org
Les Étés de la Danse Théâtre du Châtelet, June 28-July 16
The New York City Ballet will take up residency in Paris this summer, presenting a variety of works from its repertoire, including George Balanchine’s “The Four Temperaments” and Jerome Robbins’s “West Side Story Suite.” Newer works by the contemporary choreographers Christopher Wheeldon, Justin Peck and Alexei Ratmansky will also be performed. lesetesdeladanse.com
Storms, War and Shipwrecks Ashmolean, through Sept. 25
This exhibition focuses on artifacts mined from the waters around Sicily, the site of centuries of sea battles and storm-strewn shipwrecks. Artifacts on view include terracotta ornaments, marble statues and bronze armor. Above, a bronze statue of Reshef, an ancient Phoenician god of war and thunder, from around 1000 B.C. The show also includes information on some of the crews involved in the expeditions. ashmolean.org
New Romance: Art and the Posthuman Museum of Contemporary Art, through Sept. 4
The theme of this exhibition deals with what it means to be a human in the modern, machine-driven world. Many of the artworks on view are science fiction-oriented, and focus on the possibility of a robot-driven future. The Australian and South Korean artists on view include Ian Burns, Wonbin Yang, Soyo Lee and Siyon Jin. mca.com.au
Haruki Murakami and Illustrators Chihiro Art Museum, through Aug. 7
The Japanese author Haruki Murakami’s sometimes-dark, sometimes whimsical novels (like the celebrated, surrealist book “Kafka on the Shore”) take place in a world populated by surreal goings-on, and strange, opaque characters. This exhibition looks at work by some of the artists Mr. Murakami has worked with on picture books and other projects. Illustrators include Makoto Wada, Maki Sasaki and Ayumi Ohashi. chihiro.jp
Degas: A New Vision NGV International, June 24-Sept. 18
The French artist Edgar Degas is best known for his kinetic images of ballet dancers warming up, dancing and lounging. Many of those images are in this retrospective, as are some of his lesser-known works, including portraits and nudes. Around 200 pieces are on view. The museum is also showing a smaller exhibition of work by the artist Greg Semu, who recreated two famous paintings (including Géricault’s “The Raft of the Medusa”) as photographs featuring indigenous subjects. ngv.vic.gov.au
Chen Shaoxiong: Prepared Power Station of Art, through Sept. 11
The Chinese artist Chen Shaoxiong is known for a mixed media practice that includes painting, photographs and installation pieces. His best-known works are ink renderings of political protest, though some major projects combine various media. Some of his works are in this solo show. Most of the exhibition focuses on his output over the past 15 years, including two new works from this year. powerstationofart.com
Festival International de Jazz de Montreal Festival site, June 29-July 9
Each year, this jazz festival draws major crowds to the center of Montreal to see Québecois jazz acts and major names. The acts this year include Cat Power, Brian Wilson and Lauryn Hill,. Performers like Andria Simone, a soul singer from Ontario; Jane McGarrigle, a folk singer from Quebec; and Popa Chubby, a New York-born singer and guitarist, will also appear. montrealjazzfest.com
Julidans Various venues, June 30-July 10
Punk dance from France, abstract solo choreography from Spain and a Hungarian piece inspired by war dance rituals from across the world are on view in this lineup, a showcase of contemporary works from around Europe. Pieces include the choreographer Jefta van Dinther’s “Protagonist,” a piece for 14 dancers; “COKE,” which the German choreographer Arco Renz developed with dancers from the Philippines; and “barbarians,” an evening of work by the popular British group Hofesh Shechter Company. julidans.nl

