One of the thrills of “Hamilton” is in watching the flexibility of its performers as they effortlessly bounce between musical styles — it’s a testament to the versatility of the talents they brought in the door with them. Musical theater has its own native grammar, but this show and its stars hammer away at it with every song, rebuilding it in their own image.
That’s even more clear when listening to them outside of the confines of “Hamilton.” Two of the show’s Tony-winning stars have recently released albums: Daveed Diggs’s noise-rap group, clipping., has a new EP, “Wriggle.” And Leslie Odom Jr. has just updated and rereleased his self-titled solo debut.
They serve as a reminder of life after “Hamilton,” but also of life before it. For Mr. Diggs, his music career began years ago, and, one suspects, will continue long after “Hamilton” fades. For Mr. Odom, who announced he’ll be leaving “Hamilton” next month, the show has served as a catalyst for the next phase of his career, one in which he gets to sing with no one else onstage.
NEW RELEASE “Leslie Odom Jr.” (S-Curve)
IN “HAMILTON” Aaron Burr, sir. Mr. Odom’s portrayal of Alexander Hamilton’s nemesis and eventual killer was the emotional anchor of the show, and earned him the Tony Award for best performance by a leading actor in a musical.
SIGNATURE “HAMILTON” MUSICAL MOMENT “Dear Theodosia,” in which Burr sings to his newborn daughter about how building a new nation is an act of parental responsibility as much as political.
PERSONAL MUSICAL STYLE Tender jazz vocals with flashes of adult-contemporary R&B.
THE SOUND This covers collection is elegant and warm, exceedingly mannered but also keenly felt. Mr. Odom’s voice is lithe and surprisingly delicate when he’s not projecting it toward the back of the house. Mr. Odom is far more reliant on his upper register here than in “Hamilton,” and far more reliant on his plaintive side. And the music, produced by Joseph Abate, is bursting with pinpoint detail, almost porcelain in its balance of structure and fragility.
STANDOUT SONG Mr. Odom’s take on “Joey, Joey, Joey,” from the Frank Loesser musical “The Most Happy Fella,” is startling. He sings meditatively and with real viscosity about temptation, and the song is full of emphatic piano, stark bass and conspiratorial drums. You can hear the moistness in Mr. Odom’s delivery when he senses the possibilities that await him: “smelling like Oregon cherries/or maybe Texas avocado something like Arizona sugar beets.”
UNEXPECTED REFERENCE POINT “Love Look Away,” from the Rodgers & Hammerstein musical “Flower Drum Song,” sounds like silky Chicago steppers music.
“HAMILTON” MOMENTS THE ALBUM RECALLS “Joey, Joey, Joey” has a bit of the longing that Burr carries like a burden in “Wait for It,” and the military drums on “I Know That You Know” recalls the musical motifs that recur throughout “Hamilton,” like in “The Adams Administration,” but with less eye-popping intensity and more slow-burn embrace.
NEW RELEASE clipping.’s “Wriggle.” EP (Sub Pop)
IN “HAMILTON” Double duty as the Marquis de Lafayette and Thomas Jefferson, a trans-Atlantic triumph that earned him the Tony Award for best performance by a featured actor in a musical.
SIGNATURE “HAMILTON” MUSICAL MOMENT On “Guns and Ships,” Lafayette arrives like a drone strike, rapping with fervor about taking out the Redcoats.
PERSONAL MUSICAL STYLE Rapping like someone running 25 100-meter dashes all at once.
THE SOUND Mr. Diggs has been a member of clipping. for several years, and this EP contains songs from the sessions of its 2014 album, “CLPPNG” (Sub Pop), that weren’t completed in time for that album’s release. Mr. Diggs is a crafty and dexterous rapper, an inheritor of West Coast eccentrics from Freestyle Fellowship to E-40. And he’s percussive, as well, playing musical shootout with the skittish, glitchy production of bandmates William Hutson and Jonathan Snipes.
STANDOUT SONG The title track is frenetic and salacious, an industrial updating of Miami bass music that sounds like what might happen if you took a pneumatic drill to a 12-inch single of Outkast’s “B.O.B.” It samples a song by the pioneering extreme noise band Whitehouse that is full of naughty lyrics, which Mr. Diggs happily echoes and adds to: “This ain’t your first rodeo show/Maybe you better act like you know how to ride it like a Pogo/They don’t want it slo-mo, don’t stop.”
UNEXPECTED REFERENCE POINT On “Shooter,” Mr. Diggs repurposes the hashtag rap structure popularized by Drake a few years ago, taking it from an “aha!” tactic to a whole worldview, using it on almost every line of the song.
“HAMILTON” MOMENTS THE ALBUM RECALLS There are a handful of tough songs in “Hamilton,” especially in the second act. The production on this EP is simpatico with the electronic explosions on “The Reynolds Pamphlet,” which features some of Jefferson’s cleverest rapping. And Mr. Diggs’s bouncy approach on the saucy collaboration with Cakes Da Killa recalls the fierce energy Jefferson brings in “Cabinet Battle #1” and “Cabinet Battle #2.”

