Two reputed members of the Latin Kings gang in the Bronx have pleaded guilty to manslaughter charges for gunning down a 17-year-old boy who was singled out by former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg as “a victim of too many guns on our streets.”
One of the gang members, Raul Pacheco, pleaded guilty on Tuesday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx to first-degree manslaughter, prosecutors said, and the other, Eric Landron, pleaded guilty to the same charge last week.
Mr. Pacheco, 25, faces up to 18 years in prison and five years of post-release supervision, and Mr. Landron, 26, could be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison and five years of post-release supervision, prosecutors said. Both men will be sentenced in July. Information on their lawyers was not immediately available.
On the night of April 22, 2013, the authorities said, the teenager, Alphonza Bryant III, was hanging out with friends on Fox Street in the Morrisania neighborhood when Mr. Pacheco and Mr. Landron fired 10 shots at Alphonza, hitting him in the chest. The shooting was meant to send a message to rival gang members on the block, prosecutors said, but Alphonza was targeted by mistake.
The teenager, known by friends as BeeJay, was killed just four blocks from where his father had also been fatally shot two weeks before Alphonza's fourth birthday. After Alphonza's death, his mother, Jenaii van Doten, said she had been strict with him, ordering her son, who was weeks from his high school graduation, to be home every night by 10 o'clock. Yet he was shot just after 8 p.m. “It wasn't even curfew time,” his mother said in 2013.
Mr. Bloomberg seized upon Alphonza's killing as an example of the toll gun violence was having on the streets of New York and the role the Police Department's stop-and-frisk tactics had in stemming the violence.
Ms. van Doten responded in an essay in The Daily News that Alphonza had been stopped and frisked. She argued the contentious policy was “not working the way they intended,” but that she ultimately supported it. “Some people are saying stop-and-frisks are terrorizing our kids,” Ms. van Doten wrote. “Maybe my son wouldn't have been shot if the right kids were terrorized.”

