Pop Poet: Who says nobody reads poetry anymore? On the paperback trade fiction list, a debut collection called “Milk and Honey,” by the Canadian writer Rupi Kaur, is going strong at No. 8 after nine weeks. Kaur is a 23-year-old social media phenom from Toronto who gained attention last year when she fought Instagram's removal of a photo she posted showing menstrual blood. As her audience grew — she now has 475,000 followers on Instagram and 34,500 on Twitter — Kaur earned a reputation not only for her photos and ­sketches but also for brief, plain-­spoken ­poems tackling feminism, love, trauma and healing in short lines that can be as smooth as pop music (“love will hold you / love will call your name”) or as jagged as rusty metal (“the hurt / the loss / the pain / the breaking”). Much of Kaur's appeal comes from this artless vulnerability, like a cross between Charles Bukowski and Cat Power, and from an ingénue's willingness to blurt out whatever is on her mind. “I was always writing for myself,” she told The Times of India this month. “I wrote what I needed to write and hear — that's what makes it powerful. And it's this honesty that has got me where I am today.” Well, that and some serious marketing savvy: Besides “Milk and Honey,” which she initially self-­published, visitors to Kaur's website can also buy jars of artisanal honey branded with her name, “from the hives of distinguished queen bees.” And she has ideas about how to expand her reach. “There have been articles saying that all women need to read my book,” she told The Times of India. “I ask, why not all men? In fact, that would be even more valuable because we women want to sit down with men and tell them — this is how we feel, this is what we go through.”
The Inheritance: Yaa Gyasi's debut novel, “Homegoing,” hits the hardcover fiction list at No. 15. The book details Ghana's slave trade in the 1700s and follows its effects among generations of Ghanaians both in and out of America. “Oftentimes, when West African immigrants get to America, there's this idea that they're set apart from African-­Americans,” Gyasi told Vogue. “In a lot of ways, culturally, they are. I wanted to show what it is actually that connects us, and I had to go really far back to get there.”
Quotable: Terry McMillan's breakthrough novel, “Waiting to Exhale,” spent more than a year on the hardcover and paperback lists back in the 1990s, and every novel she has written since has also been a best seller. (Her latest, “I Almost Forgot About You,” enters the hardcover list at No. 12.) But according to a recent essay in The Washington Post, the book that mattered most to McMillan in her early teens wasn't a novel at all; it was Bartlett's Familiar Quotations. “This book of passages, phrases and proverbs,” she writes, “helped me acknowledge that I didn't need to feel ashamed or embarrassed, because other people had thought about a lot of the things I did — and not always in the same way.”

