Kelly Marie Jensen and Michael Christos Sembos were married June 25 by Andrew Keeler, a Universal Life minister, at Roger Wiliams Park Botanical Center in Providence, R.I.
The bride, 34, is the corporate photographer at Yale-New Haven Health System. She graduated from the University of Virginia and is the daughter of Kathleen M. Jensen and William G. Jensen of Vernon, Conn.
The groom, 37, is a program coordinator for the Yale University Office of Development in New Haven. He is also a New Haven-based musician who sings and plays guitar with a rock band called the Backyard Committee. He received two bachelor’s degrees, in math and in astronomy, from Western Connecticut State University. He is the son of Karen G. Sembos and Evangelos Sembos of Bridgeport, Conn.
Ms. Jensen and Mr. Sembos met at a music festival in Durham, Conn., in May 2010. They were living in New Haven and had been invited by mutual friends, whereupon they decided to ride a Ferris wheel together. “I felt this immediate physical attraction for him,” she said. “I just sat down next to him and started nervously blathering.”
Though Mr. Sembos said he felt the same attraction, he was seeing someone else at the time, so they initially settled on becoming friends.
Over the next two years, she would often run into him around town, or playfully connect with him online, where they would engage in some intense games of Scrabble or chat about music or photography. No matter where their paths crossed, she did her best to see if his social status had changed.
“I’d be like, ‘O.K., here’s my phone number and email address and you could always get me on Facebook,’ but I would never really hear from him as far as going out was concerned,” she said.
In May 2012, her text came in. He invited her to a concert in Norfolk, Conn., and she accepted. They began seeing each other but were not yet dating. Mr. Sembos introduced Ms. Jensen — a longtime fan of gin — to the joys of a dirty martini, and to the Beatles catalog. She taught him how to drive a stick shift.
In August 2012, Ms. Jensen went on a 10-day California vacation with her best friend, during which Mr. Sembos realized he was ready for a deeper commitment. “I couldn’t ignore it any longer,” he said.
“It was a great feeling to know that things were progressing,” said Ms. Jensen.
On Halloween morning, Mr. Sembos was awakened from a deep sleep by Ms. Jensen, who was dressed like Elvis and singing and strutting on his bed to “Jailhouse Rock.”
“I loved her sense of humor, so that just sealed the deal for me,” he said. “I just knew I could never let a girl like this go.”
In January 2015, he took her on an elaborate trip but did not reveal where they were going. She was given some pretty obvious clues a month before in the form of Christmas gifts: a bathing suit, a dashboard hula girl for her car and a copy of Elvis’s "Aloha From Hawaii" on vinyl.
On the second day into their Hawaiian trip, they sat on the edge of a cliff over a black sand beach in Pololu Valley, on the Big Island, watching the sun rise, when Mr. Sembos removed a ring he had hidden in a sock in his backpack, and proposed.
Ms. Jensen, shocked, responded with an expletive.
“I told her I needed further clarification,” he said, laughing. “And then I got my yes.”

