Alex Rodriguez emerged from the Yankees’ clubhouse two hours before the game against the Texas Rangers on Monday at Yankee Stadium. He hunched over on the dugout steps, looking meditatively out at the field.
Rodriguez then walked toward the batting cage, helmet in his right hand and two bats in his left. Kneeling down, Rodriguez began massaging his bats and meticulously patting them down with a rosin bag, ready to go to work.
Only Rodriguez was not in the starting lineup, benched against a right-handed starting pitcher for the second straight game.
General Manager Brian Cashman said that he met with Manager Joe Girardi and the Yankees staff a few days ago and decided the best short-term plan was to make Carlos Beltran the designated hitter against right-handed pitching. Aaron Hicks started in right field.
“Carlos has been so hot, to keep him going, we want to play him every day,” Cashman said. “If we take advantage of some time to D.H. him here, play him in the outfield in San Diego while we’re in the National League ballpark, where we lose the D.H., it’s going to come at the expense of Alex. That’s it. None of these things are easy decisions.”
Cashman cited Rodriguez’s .584 on-base plus slugging percentage against right-handed pitchers. “Alex has struggled mightily against right-handed pitching this year, and again, we’re almost hitting July,” he said, adding, “It’s the winds of change, and it’s blowing us certain directions.”
Neither Girardi nor Cashman labeled the move a platoon.
Entering Monday, the Yankees were 37-37, seven and a half games behind the first-place Baltimore Orioles in the American League East. They have shown little ability to move above the .500 mark all season.
“Time’s of the essence,” Cashman said as Rodriguez took batting practice a few steps away. “We can’t keep treading water, and I want to be a contender, not a pretender. That’s why the last two weeks we were like, this team’s going to have to show us sooner than later that what we had last year was real and can happen again. I believe the team on paper is better than it was last year, it just hasn’t played that way. At some point, you are what your record says.”
Cashman said the Yankees had not discussed releasing Rodriguez, who will be 41 in July and is due to make $21 million per year through 2017.
Girardi said that it was a hard decision to sit Rodriguez, who is batting .223 with eight home runs. Entering Monday, Beltran led the team in hits (74), home runs (19) and R.B.I. (53).
Rodriguez said that he felt healthy and that he was a little surprised by the decision. After a short session with the news media, he collected his gear and headed toward the field to continue his regular pregame routine, as if he were starting.
“I’ve always enjoyed proving people wrong, and I’ll be ready to play,” Rodriguez said. “I’ll be ready when my number’s called.”

