BEIJING — An unusually fierce tornado ravaged an eastern Chinese city on Thursday, killing at least 98 people and injuring 800 others, catapulting cars, ginkgo trees and cellphone towers through the air, and reducing homes to piles of debris, the authorities said.
The storm in Yancheng, a city of 7.1 million overlooking the Yellow Sea, featured wind gusts exceeding 80 miles an hour by some accounts.
“The skies turned dark and we thought the summer torrential rain was about to begin,” said a resident of Yancheng, according to a live-blog published by Sina, a web portal. “We ran to our house. Suddenly, the roof was blown apart, bricks were falling and the house collapsed.”
Televisions flashed with scenes of horror: hospitals overwhelmed with casualties, residents combing through piles of rubble for their belongings, and dust-covered arms and legs jutting from the ground.
President Xi Jinping called for an “all-out rescue effort,” according to CCTV, the state broadcaster, and the authorities said that hundreds of rescuers had been sent to Yancheng to sort through the wreckage. Nearly half of the injured were in serious condition, the Chinese Ministry of Civil Affairs said late Thursday.
The tornado, which began around 2:30 p.m. and was accompanied by hailstorms, destroyed thousands of homes and stores, as well as several manufacturing plants and rice mills, according to news reports. Yancheng is known as a center of textile production and farming in Jiangsu Province.
A man who gave his last name as Zhang told China News Service that he had been driving along a street when he noticed that trees were falling in a “strange way.” He pulled over, and soon the winds lifted his car and threw it into a river.
Tornadoes are relatively common in Jiangsu Province, in China’s southeast, with more than 1,000 recorded over the past six decades, according to Chinese news reports. Southern China has faced several bouts of extreme weather recently, with floods killing more than 20 people this week.
The tornado that struck Yancheng was particularly violent, and the authorities were still trying to make sense of the high death toll.

