An aggressive new ad from Rebuilding America Now, a “super PAC” supporting Donald J. Trump's presidential campaign, tries to paint Hillary Clinton, his presumptive Democratic opponent, as anti-woman.
A squinting, subtly nodding Mrs. Clinton is shown in the screen's left corner, as a female narrator intones: “So who is all for women, until she isn't? Hillary Clinton.” A photo of Bill Cosby in a hooded sweatshirt appears opposite her, as the narrator pointedly quotes from a Twitter post by Mrs. Clinton responding to the many sexual assault allegations against Mr. Cosby: “Every survivor of sexual assault deserves to be believed.”
“But when another Bill was accused of sexual assault,” the narrator continues — as a photograph of a leeringly smiling Bill Clinton appears, seeming to rub his hands together — “not so much.” As quotations from a New York Times article flash onscreen, the narrator exaggerates the article's findings: “She called those women ‘loony toon,' and stage-managed their destruction from a White House war room. She savaged their dignity and shamed them.” The ad closes with a video snippet of Mrs. Clinton as first lady, saying, “Some folks are going to have a lot to answer for,” and the hashtag “#anythingforpower.”
The ad mirrors attacks Donald J. Trump has been leveling from the campaign trail, trying to use Mr. Clinton's sexual scandals to undercut Mrs. Clinton's argument that she is a champion for women and issues they care about — and to blunt and defeat Democratic attacks portraying Mr. Trump as a misogynist.
While Mrs. Clinton did once privately refer to Monica Lewinsky as a “narcissistic loony toon,” according to the diaries of a close friend that were made public after her death, the ad takes liberties with the January Times article recounting her role in her husband's 1990s scandals: The article reported that words like “floozy,” “bimbo” or “stalker” were used to describe Mr. Clinton's accusers, but not that Mrs. Clinton ever used them.
On cable systems nationwide, an unexpected choice given that Mr. Trump needs to gain ground against Mrs. Clinton in battleground states in particular.
The ad — which Mrs. Clinton's campaign called “desperate and false” — begins to fill a vacuum: Mr. Trump hasn't run a television ad since early May. But while it adds to Mr. Trump's case that Mrs. Clinton is dishonest and fundamentally out for herself, and deflects charges that he is sexist, it seems unlikely to win him new converts. Suggesting that the first female presidential nominee of a major party is anti-woman could prove a tough sell.

