As Starlin Castro rounded third base, his eyes were fixed on his Yankees teammates, who had gathered around home plate ready to mob him after his home run leading off the ninth inning capped a 9-8 comeback win over the Colorado Rockies on Wednesday at Yankee Stadium.
Castro's path intersected with that of Jason Motte, who had surrendered his home run. Motte, who was headed toward his dugout, let Castro pass in front of him and put his glove over his mouth and shouted something.
Motte would not reveal what he said. Castro, with a smile, said he could not remember, but the interplay suggested some significance for the former teammates.
It was the first walk-off home run for Castro, and it surely dampened any plans Motte had for celebrating his 34th birthday Wednesday.
“He's a really good friend,” said Castro, who had lined out against Motte the previous night. “He's trying to do his job; I'm trying to do mine.”
The home run punctuated an inspiring victory for the Yankees as pressure has increased on the team's management to trade some established players and begin rebuilding in earnest. They are five and a half games behind Baltimore, in fourth place in the American League East.
“We need any kind of wins we can get at this point,” Manager Joe Girardi said.
It was an unlikely one. After the Yankees jumped to an early lead on Chase Headley's second-inning grand slam, the Rockies pounded C. C. Sabathia just as they had virtually every other pitcher the Yankees threw at them over the four games the teams played in the last nine days.
When Nick Hundley hit a three-run homer off Sabathia's 0-2 cutter, it put the Rockies ahead, 5-4, in the fourth. They built the lead to 8-4 when Ryan Raburn hit a two-run homer off Anthony Swarzak.
The Yankees surged back in the seventh when Carlos Beltran hit a three-run homer off Jordan Lyles and Didi Gregorius lined a two-out, two-strike single to left, scoring Brian McCann with the tying run. Castro kept the inning alive, beating out a grounder up the middle.
Swarzak, who rebounded after the home run, combined with Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman to retire the final 14 Rockies, eight by strikeout. That set the stage for Castro to come to the plate to begin the ninth, which is also when Motte entered for the Rockies.
Castro and Motte played together last year for the Chicago Cubs, where they helped energize Wrigley Field late in the season. When Motte began clapping his hands and stamping his feet to Castro's walk-up song, a Dominican pop tune, the entire crowd soon made a habit of joining in, briefly creating a fiestalike atmosphere at the ballpark.
Motte said before the game that he was disappointed that Castro had changed his song, which he joked might have spared him from clapping his hands when Castro came to the plate on Tuesday night.
Motte, a quirky veteran who grew up in Montgomery, N.Y., and pitched at Iona, had been one of the few reliable members of the Rockies' bullpen. He had allowed one hit and no runs over his previous eight appearances. But it was the third time he and Castro had faced each other in recent days. After Motte threw a fastball for a strike, Castro knew he was going to see an off-speed pitch.
“Every time that I've faced that guy, he's always thrown me that breaking pitch,” Castro, 26, said. “I didn't look for a changeup. I just looked for something soft, and finally he threw it for a strike.”
Motte said: “I threw it, and he hit it 700 feet. I didn't go back and watch it. What good would it do?”
Motte was following the book on Castro, who, after a scintillating start to the season, has floundered near .200 since May 3. Though Castro has extremely quick, lively hands, he has been kicking himself for not being more patient, too often chasing pitches out of the strike zone.
“If I keep swinging at the ball in the dirt, they're going to keep throwing it there,” said Castro, whose 10th home run was one of three hits. “When I stop, then they have to throw me strikes.”
Castro had long been a tantalizing talent in Chicago, where until last season he had languished on bad teams. Though he was a three-time All-Star, he also frustrated Cubs management with his plate discipline and his fielding. He lost the shortstop job to Addison Russell last season before being shifted to second base and was traded to the Yankees to make room for the more reliable Ben Zobrist.
Those experiences have probably served Castro well in coming to New York, said his teammates, who sometimes have to remind themselves that he is only 26.
Headley, whose grand slam was the Yankees' first this season, said of Castro: “I feel like he's been around forever, and he's been critiqued at a level that most guys aren't just because he had so much success early on. Good seasons for a lot of guys aren't good seasons for him.”
Just like Wednesday, when a good day for Castro was not a good day for everyone else.

