ATLANTA — The Mets’ sputtering offense was transformed last summer through trades, the return of injured players and the promotion of a top outfield prospect. Before Saturday’s 1-0 win in 11 innings over the Atlanta Braves at Turner Field, the Mets made three moves that they hope can again enliven their slumping lineup into one with playoff potential.
First, the Mets signed Jose Reyes, their former four-time All-Star, to a minor league contract. The Colorado Rockies released Reyes after he had served a suspension over domestic abuse allegations. The Mets are hoping that Reyes, 33, a longtime shortstop with experience at second base, can learn to play third base and other positions as well.
“He brings something to the table and to our team that obviously we don’t have, that foot speed and athleticism,” said Mets Manager Terry Collins, whose team ranks near the bottom of the major leagues in runs and stolen bases.
Second, the Mets promoted the outfield prospect Brandon Nimmo, the team’s first-round pick in 2011. Lastly, they demoted the struggling outfielder Michael Conforto, whose hot bat was part of last year’s second-half surge.
“Frankly, we felt we put it off a little too long and maybe to Michael’s detriment,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said.
Although the Mets won on Saturday, the offense could have used a spark. Kelly Johnson, acquired this month from the Braves, smashed a pinch-hit home run in the 11th inning.
“Right now, it’s been one of those stretches where runs are hard to come by,” Johnson said.
For eight scoreless innings, Mets starter Jacob deGrom was locked in a pitchers’ duel with Julio Teheran. Over his last 41 innings, deGrom has received two runs of support while compiling a 2.45 E.R.A.
“Those zero-zero games, every pitch is big,” deGrom said.
To close out the game, the Mets gambled. With one out, Collins had closer Jeurys Familia intentionally walk the potential go-ahead run, Freddie Freeman, who has hit well against the Mets in the past. Familia then snared Nick Markakis’s ground ball to start a game-ending double play.
“I know that Nick is swinging the bat good, but I’ve had enough of Freddie,” Collins said.
Although Reyes’s addition was open to criticism, the Mets saw an opportunity. Reyes was arrested Oct. 31 after his wife told the police that he had grabbed her throat and shoved her into a sliding-glass door at a Hawaii resort. Charges were dropped after she did not cooperate with prosecutors.
But Major League Baseball suspended Reyes for 51 games under a new domestic violence policy. The Rockies designated Reyes for assignment on June 15, then could not find a trade partner for him and placed him on release waivers, which ended Saturday.
Alderson said the Mets felt that Reyes was contrite and deserved a second chance. Nearly 75 minutes after Reyes became a free agent on Saturday afternoon, the Mets announced that he had signed a minor league deal.
“A second chance with conditions,” Alderson said.
Reyes, who hit .274 last season between the Rockies and the Toronto Blue Jays, will start at third base on Sunday for the Class A Brooklyn Cyclones. Team officials said they believed he might need seven to 10 days in the minors.
After Conforto’s second strikeout in Friday’s game, Collins decided it was time for a reset.
“Let’s get him right,” Collins said. “We’re getting near the All-Star break. We need him to come out of that break and have Michael Conforto be the guy that we saw last year at this time.”
Conforto, 23, has hit .148 with six home runs and 48 strikeouts since May 1. Before traveling to Class AAA Las Vegas, Conforto said that he was disappointed but understood.
“I know I can play here,” Conforto said. “I know I’ve had success. I’ve just got to find it again. I’ll work hard and hopefully I’ll be back here soon.”
Conforto’s replacement, Nimmo, arrived at Turner Field late Saturday afternoon, and Collins said he expected to play Nimmo in left field on Sunday.
“I’m not the savior of the team,” Nimmo said. “I’m just here to try and help and contribute in the way that I play the game. If that helps us win, then that’s great.”

