LONDON — When the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited a promised gift of about 80 Cubist artworks from the cosmetics magnate Leonard A. Lauder in 2014, the museum hailed Cubism as “the most influential art movement of the early 20th century,” one that “radically changed the way we see the world today.”
That assessment seemed to have been endorsed on Tuesday night, when Sotheby’s sold Picasso’s 1909 painting “Femme assise” for 43.3 million pounds with fees, or about $63.6 million. It was bought by one of two anonymous telephone bidders against a low estimate of £30 million.
But although “Femme assise” set an auction high for a Cubist work — and was the highest price for any artwork sold at auction in London since 2010 — Cubism, for all its influence, is less coveted by collectors than other periods of Picasso’s career and other 20th-century movements. Cubism’s intellectual methodology and monochromatic palette have sometimes made it a hard sell.
“Sotheby’s did well with the Picasso,” said Guy Jennings, managing director of the Fine Art Fund Group in London. “It was a very strong price for a tough painting. Cubism should be the top period, but they’re not the easiest pictures commercially.”
“Femme assise,” entered by the New York real estate magnate Sheldon Solow, according to the Baer Faxt trade newsletter, had been acquired at Sotheby’s in 1973 for £340,000. Helena Newman, Sotheby’s chairwoman of Impressionist and modern art in Europe, declined to comment on the identity of the seller. It was one of several experimental portraits Picasso made of his lover Fernande Olivier in the summer of 1909 at Horta de Ebro in his native Spain.
It was the first museum-quality Picasso Cubist oil to have appeared on the market since 1997, when Mr. Lauder paid $24.8 million for the 1913 “Femme assise dans un fauteuil (Eva).”
The $63.6 million price was far below the $179.4 million paid in May 2015 at Christie’s for Picasso’s 1955 painting “Les Femmes d’Alger (Version ‘O’),” or indeed the $106 million or so that the dealer Larry Gagosian paid privately in that same month for a 1931 plaster bust of Marie-Thérèse Walter.
Tellingly, Amedeo Modigliani’s more obviously alluring 1919 three-quarter-length portrait “Jeanne Hébuterne (au foulard)” attracted five telephone bidders at Sotheby’s, pushing the price to £38.5 million, or about $56.6 million, against an estimate of £28 million. This typically stylized depiction of the artist’s ill-fated companion and muse — Hébuterne committed suicide in 1920 the day after Modigliani’s death — had been entered by a seller identified by Bloomberg News as the Syrian-born billionaire Wafic Saïd, who had bought the painting at auction in 1986 for $2.9 million, according to the ArtNet database. Unlike the Picasso, the painting was certain to sell, courtesy of a third-party “irrevocable bid.”
The Picasso and the Modigliani were the standouts in a week of Impressionist and modern auctions depleted by sellers’ concerns over a cooling art market and the referendum on Britain’s continued membership in the European Union, with its possible effect on the value of the pound.
Sotheby’s sale of just 27 lots nonetheless grossed £103.3 million, with just three lots unsold. That said, the Picasso and the Modigliani represented almost 80 percent of the evening’s take, with an 1890 Gauguin still life lagging far behind at £3.4 million, bought by Acquavella Galleries of New York. The equivalent sale last year brought in £178.6 million from 50 works.
“The market moves along in spite of these crises of confidence,” said Mary Hoeveler, an art adviser based in New York. “The offering wasn’t stellar, but the estimates had been made as accessible as possible. People are always looking for value.”
The picture was altogether gloomier the following night at Christie’s, whose evening Impressionist and Modern art auction brought in £25.6 million from 33 lots, 36 percent of which failed to sell. The total was well below the £32.9 million presale estimate and 64 percent less than the £71.5 million Christie’s achieved at the equivalent Impressionist and Modern sale last June.
But certain high-value lots were not included in the sale, such as Henry Moore’s monumental bronze “Reclining Figure: Festival,” estimated at £15 million to £20 million. The piece had been diverted to Christie’s 250th-anniversary “Defining British Art” sale set for June 30.
“Twentieth-century masterpieces are in demand, and the Christie’s auction was lacking this kind of material,” said Patrick Legant, an art adviser based in London. “Most of the works offered were not reflecting the quality the market is looking for.“
The highest price paid was £8.3 million by a telephone bidder for Modigliani’s somber 1917 half-length portrait of Hanka Zborowska, the wife of his dealer Leopold Zborowski, which had an estimate of £5 million to £7 million. An 1872 Monet oil, “L’Ancienne rue de la chaussée,” failed to sell against a low estimate of £4.5 million, showing how early Impressionism is another art movement whose historical importance has not been fully matched by its commercial value.
With international buyers and sellers wary of Britain’s future in Europe, Christie’s found success on Monday with its sale of homegrown modern British and Irish art that raised £14.8 million from 49 lots with an 80 percent success rate.
“Mod Brits” have long been regarded as a regional backwater of the art market, but recently artists with international reputations like Henry Moore, Barbara Hepworth, Ben Nicholson and Bridget Riley have attracted a broader spectrum of buyers, particularly from Asia.
At this month’s Art Basel fair in Switzerland, for example, the dealer David Zwirner sold Bridget Riley’s monumental new horizontally striped abstract, “Coda,” to the Long Museum in Shanghai, founded by the private collectors Liu Yiqian and his wife, Wang Wei. The asking price was £750,000.
At Christie’s on Monday, Elaine Holt, the company’s director of Impressionist and modern art in Hong Kong, was bidding for clients on Barbara Hepworth sculptures, such as the gray slate, “Two Forms in Echelon,” from 1963, which sold for £662,500.
“At no stage has the market been so international,” said Matthew Bradbury, head of Modern British and Irish art at Bonhams, whose June 15 “Mod Brit” sale in London raised £8.3 million, more than double the previous high for that category of auction at the company.
Works from the collection of Cyril Reddihough, a lawyer based in Yorkshire who was a supporter and friend of Ben Nicholson, contributed £4.9 million to that total. Among them was a 1945 Moore plaster “Reclining Figure,” which climbed to £1.8 million, more than 10 times the low estimate.
“The Reddihough collection drew in people we don’t normally see,” said Mr. Bradbury, whose sale attracted two bidders from mainland China and six from Hong Kong, as well as others from Switzerland and Italy. “There’s a perception that traditional Mod Brit sales have been undervalued.”
It was perhaps contradictory that the market for British art should be attracting a wider than ever international audience days before Britain itself made the decision to cut some of its international ties.
Artworks, unlike nationalist politicians, depend on a wider world for their success. During the next couple of years we will see how Thursday’s momentous “Brexit” vote affects London’s long-held status as the capital of the European art market.

