WASHINGTON — In the midst of a third-inning meltdown Monday, Mets starter Noah Syndergaard summoned catcher Travis d'Arnaud to the mound. Something was not right with Syndergaard; his command had oddly disappeared. Moments later, Syndergaard called for d'Arnaud again, and boos rained down from Washington Nationals fans.
A pedestrian Mets offense had staked Syndergaard to an early four-run lead, but even Syndergaard, their best pitcher, wilted, delivering by far his worst start of the season. A head-shaking 11-4 loss Monday to a division rival capped a miserable day for the Mets.
“Just frustrating and kind of embarrassing outing because of the standards I put underneath myself to go out there and achieve,” Syndergaard said.
Two of the Mets' young starters have dealt with elbow problems in recent starts, and neither offered encouraging progress Monday. The Mets acknowledged that Steven Matz's recurring elbow discomfort was because of a bone spur. They have not decided if he will continue pitching with it this season.
Syndergaard shot down a report that he was also dealing with a bone spur, but Mets Manager Terry Collins did not want to tempt fate with Syndergaard's elbow, so he pulled him after three laborious innings and only 71 pitches.
“I can understand that, especially coming off a little elbow scare,” Syndergaard said. “I know that there's a bigger picture involved. There's still a lot of season left, and I'd like to be able to go out there and compete the rest of the season injury-free.”
In a key late June matchup against the National League East-leading Nationals, Syndergaard was overpowered in every aspect of the game. He gave up a season-high five runs. He walked a season-high three batters, equaling his total from his previous seven starts combined.
The Nationals also had five stolen bases against Syndergaard, pushing his season total to a major league-leading 28 allowed. Three runs were scored after stolen bases Monday.
“Just focusing too much on attacking the hitter and neglecting the running game,” Syndergaard said.
The outing could easily have been brushed aside as a bad game in an otherwise stellar season for Syndergaard. But he had left his previous start because of elbow discomfort and required a visit to the team doctor for anti-inflammatory medication and an examination.
And before Monday's game, Collins acknowledged that the team might have to manage Syndergaard and Matz through their respective elbow problems.
“Nothing structurally with my elbow at all,” Syndergaard said. “Sometimes a little wear and tear will do that to you. My arm feels really good. I've just got to be ready to go in five days.”
The game began with promise for the Mets. In the first inning, a struggling offense produced two singles and a run. But Syndergaard pitched into a jam in the bottom of the frame. Although his velocity still crackled at 100 miles per hour, Syndergaard walked two and gave up a single. He vacillated between pitches in and outside the strike zone.
It was only the second time all season that Syndergaard had pitched with the bases loaded. He escaped thanks to a forceout at home and a double play, but his pitching was foreboding.
“Just didn't have his command like he normally does today,” d'Arnaud said. “It was a little weird for me to see.”
The Mets took a 4-0 lead in the third inning when Wilmer Flores singled in two runs off the shaky Nationals starter Joe Ross. The advantage was fleeting.
The Nationals used their speed to their benefit after each hit or walk. The final tally for Syndergaard in the inning was gory: five singles, four stolen bases, one walk and a wild pitch. The Mets' 4-0 lead evaporated, becoming a 5-4 deficit.
Syndergaard did not take the mound again after that. Collins sent in the left-handed reliever Sean Gilmartin, and the Mets' hole deepened. By the sixth inning, they trailed by 11-4.
The Mets did little else against Ross, who settled into a groove with a comfortable lead against a struggling lineup. The Mets compiled 14 hits — only three fewer than the Nationals but with a big difference in runs.
The glum result overshadowed the first major league hit by the Mets outfield prospect Brandon Nimmo, who lined a ball to right field in the second for a single.
“I was really ecstatic and happy,” Nimmo said. “Obviously I wish the outcome of the game would've been different. I wish we could've won. I thought we were going to do it there for the first few innings.”
For one night, the Mets' concerns centered less on their offense than on the health of their pitching staff and a wretched collapse by Syndergaard.
INSIDE PITCH
The Mets worked out the free-agent infielder Yulieski Gourriel, a Cuban defector, at their spring training complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla. Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson, the special assistant J. P. Ricciardi and other top scouts were in attendance, the assistant general manager John Ricco said. … Jose Reyes, signed to a minor league deal Saturday, will continue his tuneup with Class AA Binghamton on Tuesday after playing his second game with short-season Class A Brooklyn on Monday. Juan Lagares will join Reyes at Binghamton to begin a rehabilitation assignment for his injured left thumb. This will help the Mets determine if Lagares can manage the sprained thumb ligament or will eventually need surgery, Ricco said.

