At a moment when communication seems to have been taken over by all things digital, alphabet books are holding strong. In fact they just keep getting more sophisticated. Sara Gillingham’s “Alpha, Bravo, Charlie,” to take one innovative example, packs quite a pleasurable wallop. It’s a big, well-organized compendium of how messages are sent and received at sea, working through the phonetic alphabet — the Alpha, Bravo, Charlie system of the title — as well as Morse code, signal flags, and the extremely old-school semaphore system, in which letters are represented by a person holding two flags in specific positions. Each page contains a wealth of clearly explained information that ties together all the nautical communication systems, adding for good measure other useful maritime facts. The page for “I,” for example, shows the flag “India,” which means “I am turning left.” We also learn that boats can use Morse code to send the same message by giving two blasts, and we get a trick for remembering left (port) from right (starboard): “A ship that is sailing out to the ocean has ‘left port.’ ”
Gillingham, the author and illustrator of picture books including “How to Grow a Friend” and many interactive books for toddlers, brings a stylish and simple graphic style to the pages, with bright colors and sharp shapes along with print-like textures that give the solid colors a vintage feel. For ship-loving children —and those of any age who revel in cracking codes and learning how symbol systems work — “Alpha, Bravo, Charlie” will be an absolute treasure.
“Daytime Visions” from the Argentine musician and author/illustrator Isol (“The Menino”) is another glorious example of how much can be done by playing around with letters. Each one gets a little story of sorts, accompanied by one of Isol’s artfully layered collaged illustrations: black-crayon-like lines and cut paper that covers or dips under the lines to create an energetic, improvisational flow. In her dream-logic world, people and animals mix freely, and even basic words bear a heavy weight of suggestion.
Some of the stories contain simply one word, with the evocative illustration worth another 999 or so. “Insomniac,” the entry for I, for example, shows a big duck with beak pointed down and eyes closed, floating on water with two little ones, also asleep, tucked under its wings. Another duckling glides nearby, its black-rimmed eyes round and awake, its head slightly downturned but not resting. What could have happened to the poor sleepless thing? “R” shows a big bird with flamboyant blue hair dramatically scolding a smaller bird with wings held sheepishly behind its back. “Never meant to be rude,” the words say. Another story you long to know more about.

