Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics weigh in on the week's most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in the Playlist. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like this format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.
Here is song manufactured by committee, designed not for the radio or for career-enhancing posterity but to be slapped atop the scrolling credits of the “Ghostbusters” remake, a shout at the crowd as it flees the theater to affirm its ticket-purchase choice the way you would encourage an M.M.A. fighter in the octagon.
Everyone is a victim here. Fall Out Boy is reduced to trademark Patrick Stump yelps over some hard guitar jabs and robbed of all its funk. Missy Elliott raps, “Let's smoke these ghosts like Backwoods,” as if someone were holding her loved ones hostage until she wrote 100 paranormal similes.
Most lazily of all, the song tethers rock to hip-hop in a clunky, patchwork manner that suggests the its conceptualizers and producers have never listened to the “Judgment Night” soundtrack, nor any other pop music released in the 23 subsequent years. JON CARAMANICA
From the electronic musician Aphex Twin's coming EP, “Cheetah,” to be released July 8, comes a new video, apparently his first in 17 years. Aphex Twin, a.k.a. Richard D. James, has been good in this medium: You may remember “Come to Daddy,” from 1997, stylishly directed by Chris Cunningham, in which a horde of schoolgirls with Aphex Twin heads run rampant in an English tower-block terrorscape. For this one, Mr. James has gone anti-professional: he gave the directing job to Ryan Wyer, a 12-year-old boy with a YouTube channel full of gameplay videos. The song is steadying verging on pretty, and the video is joyous verging on powerful: young Mr. Wyer and his friends, all wearing Aphex Twin shirts, caper around in front of a block of row housing, sped-up and slowed-down, with overuse of standard digital color effects. BEN RATLIFF
Few people are more enthusiastic about music, or share their enthusiasms more enthusiastically, than the producer-provocateur Tyler, the Creator. Take, for example, the exuberant fashion show he organized for his Golf Wang clothing line a couple of weeks ago — part Nickelodeon cartoon, part skate park.
He brings the same sort of kaleidoscopic brightness and relentless cheer to his music. This week, he posted on YouTube an unofficial remix of Zayn Malik's “Pillowtalk.” The original has a groove that's seeping verging on ponderous. Tyler, though, is partial to chipper lite-funk synthesizers, and he rescues the song — a Billboard No. 1 hit — from its self-seriousness, turning Mr. Malik from a sleepy-eyed seducer to an ecstatic wailer.
But that's just part of the charm. Just as notable as Tyler's music is his presentation: “I HAD NO ART TO GO ALONG WITH THIS SO I RECORDED MYSELF DANCING TO IT,” he wrote in the video's description. And dance he does, in a blinding all-yellow outfit — ball cap, T-shirt, shorts, slides. There are a couple of Pharrell-esque dance moves, and a few full-body exhalations — he is a beacon of merriment. But while the video already has 400,000 views, Tyler's really only performing for himself. J.C.
The composer Tyondai Braxton, who has written work for solo guitar and chamber orchestra and increasingly for percussive electronics, has just released an EP, “Oranged Out,” in support of Everytown for Gun Safety, the nonprofit organization that advocates gun control. (You can pay what you wish for it on his Bandcamp page, or stream some to get a sample.) It's a kind of techno-through-the-looking-glass, its beats arriving in twisted, whooshing tones, accumulating and finally dropping out. Mr. Braxton's imagination is impatient and fantastically rubbery, and “Hooper Delay” is a high point of the record, its mood changing entirely from beginning to end. B.R.
As songwriter, singer and fretboard virtuoso, Sarah Jarosz makes string-band music that feels utterly contemporary. “House of Mercy,” from her new album “Undercurrent,” has a melody hinting at ancient Celtic modes and an arrangement with just two voices and a handful of acoustic instruments, no drums. It zeros in, with mourning and quiet resentment and resolution, on a pivotal moment between separation and breakup: “I can hear you knocking on the door,” she sings. “I won't leave it open for you any more.” JON PARELES
There's not a hair out of place on “Mistaken,” by the avant-soul duo Marian Hill. Samantha Gongol sings as if she's putting show tunes through a SoulCycle class, and Jeremy Lloyd arranges all of his percussion pieces as if untangling a vicious knot to reveal the smoothed-out beauty lurking within. (The saxophone interjections are by Steve Davit.) This song is taken from Marian Hill's major-label debut album “Act One,” released Friday, a seamless continuation of this duo's earlier EPs, “Play” and “Sway.” Like all of its music, “Mistaken” seems to be moving both in slow motion and at double speed all at once, and impressively reconciles swing and bounce. J.C.
This week the Detroit experimental band Wolf Eyes presented a startlingly bizarre new video from its recent album, “I Am a Problem: Mind in Pieces,” released last year on Jack White's Third Man record label. Wolf Eyes's music doesn't take too much for granted; it is implicitly questioning everything always. Who is the artist? Who is the listener? Why are you here? What is music for? Where are we going?
The video for “T.O.D.D,” directed by Will Benedict with Steffen Jorgensen, might embody some of those questions. It takes a found episode of a Charlie Rose television talk show and digitally replaces the guest with a charcoal-colored being whose head looks like a conch shell; the alien has arrogantly propped a leg up on Rose's table and is mouthing the lyrics to the Wolf Eyes song, with its steady, menacing beat, if that thing toward the bottom of the being's head is called a mouth. (“I stepped inside that doorway/can't turn back, this place resists.”) Meanwhile, an image of the Eiffel Tower illuminated at night, shown in the studio background, starts going haywire: the tower eventually breaks in half and starts to swirl. A reported segment of the show, about food issues, is narrated by a woman with a dolphin's head. The alien gets on top of Mr. Rose's table and starts a slow hip-grinding motion; Mr. Rose, staring elsewhere, looks embattled. There is a sudden cutaway to shots of Paris with debris and human beings falling from the sky. One, naked, lands on the ground feet first, at the Place de la Concorde, situated between two human-size mice. And the final shot, I promise, is the weirdest of all. B.R.
The song that more or less started the bossa nova movement in Brazil — written by Antônio Carlos Jobim and Vinícius de Moraes, and recorded definitively in 1958 by João Gilberto — has drifted through the decades and ended up on the desk of… Azealia Banks. Why not? Against acoustic guitar, she sings the song in Portuguese, with restrained passion. It's a melodic slalom, and hard going if you're not a native Portuguese speaker. Is it meant to be a race, though? She runs through it in a minute and 42 seconds, beating Mr. Gilberto's time by 20 seconds. B.R.

