BEIJING — Chinese officials have pledged to replace school running tracks made of industrial waste that have reportedly sickened thousands of children, the latest public health scandal in a country already troubled by environmental hazards including air pollution and soil contamination.
The Ministry of Education said late Wednesday that it would coordinate with environmental protection and quality inspection authorities to inspect synthetic rubber tracks in schools across China during the summer break. Substandard running tracks — called “poisonous tracks” by the news media — are to be removed. Anyone who has cut corners in the construction of school sports facilities, the ministry said, will be “severely punished.'' And it promised stricter oversight over the construction of such tracks.
A day earlier, CCTV, the state broadcaster, aired an investigative report that said manufacturers of running track rubber, many based in neighboring Hebei Province, used substandard materials and violated safety rules. The announcement also followed months of news reports from Beijing, Shanghai and several provinces about schoolchildren experiencing nosebleeds, skin rashes, dizziness and headaches after being exposed to the tracks.
“We were very angry when the problem was discovered,” said Wang Baoquan, a resident of Beijing who kept his 10-year-old daughter at home for four days this month as a health precaution. In a telephone interview, Mr. Wang said his daughter had not become sick, but many of her schoolmates had developed coughs, skin problems and nosebleeds.
Last week, his daughter's school, the Baiyunlu campus of the Beijing No. 2 Experimental Elementary School, removed running tracks that had been renovated last summer, Mr. Wang said, adding that he and many other parents took their children for checkups after health problems broke out in May.
“We guessed earlier that the school's running tracks had some problems,” he said. “When we went to parents' meetings, we would sometimes smell a very odd odor from the running tracks. But the school did nothing but pour something on the tracks' surface.”
The CCTV report, which said some tracks were made using recycled tires, cables and wires, provoked angry comments online. Some criticized government officials and school administrators for their lack of supervision.
“What kind of country would treat children's health and lives as a joke?” a user identified as SoftLipa_cen wrote on Weibo, a Chinese microblogging service similar to Twitter.
Others cited a broader problem with safety.
“Toxic running tracks, problematic vaccines, toxic milk,” a person identified as AACamille wrote of the safety problems in China. “Is there anything scarier?”
In April, in another well-publicized case of hazardous materials threatening children's health, dozens of students at a school in Jiangsu Province reportedly built on a toxic waste site developed illnesses, including leukemia.
Last month, China announced plans to make 90 percent of its polluted arable land safe to use by 2020, two years after a national survey that found around 20 percent of the country's arable land was contaminated.
Many schools subcontract the construction of running tracks to outside companies, usually to the lowest bidder, Cao Qingxin, an expert on waste rubber at the China Rubber Industry Association, said in an interview. He estimated that 2 percent of scrap tires, or around 100,000 tons a year, are recycled to make running tracks in China. Many manufacturers cut costs, he said, by using substandard glues and other materials.
The CCTV report noted that the running tracks at the Bird's Nest in Beijing, the stadium built for the 2008 Olympics, cost 1,000 renminbi, or about $150, per square meter. At one of the primary schools in Beijing plagued by “poisonous tracks,” the cost was 119 renminbi, or $18.
The poor quality control has disappointed parents like Shen Yang. Ms. Shen said her 4-year-old daughter has had a runny nose, coughs and stomachaches since May, two months after her Beijing kindergarten renovated its running tracks.
“My understanding is that products on supermarket shelves are safe no matter who produces them because they're checked for quality,'' she said. “It should be the same for running tracks, because schools need to make sure they're safe. But they failed to do this, and I just don't understand it.”
Ms. Shen was among 260 parents who signed a petition in April to demand that the tracks be replaced. The work finally started on Thursday, she said.
Asked if the Education Ministry's announcement had brought any relief, Mr. Wang said: “It takes time to clean up things like these and it requires action from different agencies. I doubt we'll see any real effects soon. For me, my priority is to guarantee my child safety and a good environment to grow up in.”

