Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking seven days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. Recipes are the heart and soul of this enterprise, but on Wednesdays, we put them aside and jam at the stove. You ought to as well. Improvisation can make you a better cook. Riff off your favorite recipe, the one you basically know by heart but always read through. Or freestyle along with me: say, pan-roasted chicken thighs with rosemary; some smashed oven-roasted new potatoes with lemon; a thatch of herb salad. (Soundtrack: the Cure, “It Can Never Be the Same.”)
You don’t have to, of course. If you want to cook from the book, Cooking is filled with precise and exacting instruction alongside all the pretty pictures. Take a run through David Tanis’s recent column on cooking crab croquetas, and see if it doesn’t make you want to fold together his recipe. Read about Anna Jones, and then roast some kale and tomatoes for her crazy-good salad with coconut, miso and tahini.
Maybe you’d like to make Melissa Clark’s recipe for pasta with seared zucchini and ricotta salata tonight. Or her recipe for charred lamb and eggplant with date-yogurt chutney. It’s early in the season for gazpacho, perhaps, but still, if you make Julia Moskin’s recipe for Seville-style gazpacho this evening, it could set you up for a good two months of making it two or three times a week. Or make Kim Severson’s recipe for cucumber-watermelon salad with hoisin sauce and jalapeño. Holy cow is it good.
Other recipes to cook tonight and in coming days can be found, as always, on Cooking. Save the ones you like to your recipe box. You can rate them when you’re done cooking, and leave notes on them if you have something helpful to add to the conversation – an ingredient substitution, say, or a cooking tip. And if you get jammed up, either by our technology or by something we’ve written, please ask for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. (Or you can find me on social media. I’m on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, Pinterest.)
Finally, whatever you end up cooking, remember to give thanks for the bounty of the nation. Elsewhere, the news is not so good. Kim was down in Cuba recently to report on the state of agriculture there as Americans jockey to shape the future of the island’s farming. And Nicholas Casey continues his devastating reporting from Venezuela, where hunger stalks the population and protesters have started to storm supermarkets, screaming for food.

