In the 1996 black comedy “Welcome to the Dollhouse,” Heather Matarazzo and Brendan Sexton III played Dawn Wiener and Brandon McCarthy, grade-school outcasts, nerd and bully. At first antagonists, they become tentative allies, only to be separated by suburban fate. “Wiener-Dog,” the new film also from the writer-director Todd Solondz, is not — title aside — a “Dollhouse” sequel. But it does depict Dawn and Brandon reunited (and it feels so weird).
One episode in this omnibus film features the still-awkward Dawn and the mildly surly Brandon as adults (here played by Greta Gerwig and Kieran Culkin) embarking on an impulsive journey, witnessed by the film's titular impassive dachshund. Recurring characters in sequels and franchises are as common as, well, sequels and franchises; recurring characters in movies that aren't sequels are more rare, and more fun. Here are a few.
Caldicott and Charters played by Naunton Wayne and Basil Radford in “The Lady Vanishes” (1938), “Night Train to Munich” (1940) and “Crook's Tour” (1941).
For the Alfred Hitchcock-directed “Vanishes,” a brisk espionage mystery set aboard a fast-moving train, the screenwriters Sidney Gilliat and Frank Lauder concocted a pair of cricket-crazy middle-age tourists — satirical targets making a point about complacency in prewar Britain — who comedically huff and puff about “confounded impudence.” For “Night Train,” another spy picture with less train action than the title implies, the pair returned, evincing slightly more interest in current events: One of them is seen reading “Mein Kampf.” The fellows got a vehicle of their own in “Crook's Tour.” Mr. Wayne and Mr. Radford also played the characters on radio, and variations of the fellows in pictures such as 1946's “Dead of Night.”
Dr. Louis Judd played by Tom Conway in “Cat People” (1942) and “The Seventh Victim” (1943).
The suave Mr. Conway played a lecherous psychiatrist in the 1942 horror classic ”Cat People.” Dr. Judd learns the hard way that it's poor form to trifle with a woman who turns into a panther when sexually aroused. Despite his fate in “Cat People,” Mr. Conway turned up as the same character in “Victim,” this time trying to shelter a young woman who has come under the sway of a bohemian Satan-worshipping sect. The Judd in this picture is similarly haughty but eventually more sympathetic.
Randolph and Mortimer Duke played by Ralph Bellamy and Don Ameche in “Trading Places” (1983) and “Coming to America” (1988).
The director John Landis cast the likable Hollywood golden-age actors Mr. Ameche and Mr. Bellamy against type as rapacious capitalist brothers for the Dan Aykroyd-Eddie Murphy, switched-identity farce, “Trading Places.” That film ended with the Duke boys (deservedly) ruined. “Coming to America” finds the brothers in a decidedly unglamorous setting for an amusing cameo in which they benefit from the casual largess of Mr. Murphy's African prince.
Mookie played by the director Spike Lee in “Do The Right Thing” (1989) and “Red Hook Summer” (2012).
The disaffected Bed-Stuy pizza delivery man played by Mr. Lee in his spectacular urban epic carries a pie in a different neighborhood almost 25 years later in his fevered 2012 indie drama. Mr. Lee even has a back story for the shift in neighborhoods.
Jay and Silent Bob played by Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith in “Clerks” (1994), and many, many more films.
The perpetually buzzed Jersey boys turned up like mascots in each of the writer-director Mr. Smith's movies from “Clerks” to 1999's “Dogma,” before getting their “Jay And Silent Bob Strike Back” in 2001. The pair has not made a live-action movie appearance since 2006's “Clerks II.”
Earl McGraw played by Michael Parks in “From Dusk Till Dawn” (1996), “Kill Bill Vol. 1” (2003), “Kill Bill Vol. 2” (2004) and “Grindhouse” (2007).
Kevin Smith and Quentin Tarantino, inspired in part by the interconnected characters in comic books, set their movies in relatively coherent “omniverses,” as fans refer to them. To that end, Mr. Tarantino cast the cult favorite Mr. Parks (initially of television's “Then Came Bronson” fame) to float through several films as a stalwart lawman named Earl McGraw. His function varies from movie to movie; he's always good to have around. (And while some see “Kill Bill Vol. 2” as a sequel, it is in fact the second half of what had been a four-hour picture. Miramax, the distributor, saw more sense in splitting it into halves.)
Ray Nicolette played by Michael Keaton in “Jackie Brown” (1997) and “Out of Sight” (1998).
When Mr. Tarantino and Steven Soderbergh discovered that they were almost simultaneously shooting adaptations of two Elmore Leonard novels that featured Ray, the same cocky-but-slightly-dim federal agent, in a supporting role, it seemed only natural to cast Mr. Keaton to play him in both films. And fortunately Mr. Keaton was game. (Incidentally, the younger selves of two other prominent characters in “Jackie Brown,” Louis and Melanie, are featured in 2014's “Life of Crime,” adapted from Mr. Leonard's “The Switch.”)
Aldous Snow played by Russell Brand in “Forgetting Sarah Marshall” (2008) and “Get Him to the Greek” (2010).
Mr. Brand's drugged-up, manically libidinous rock star Snow was a challenging romantic rival to Jason Segel in “Marshall” and an impossible-to-manage charge for Jonah Hill's beleaguered record-company stooge in “Greek.” To slightly confuse matters, Mr. Hill also appears in “Marshall,” albeit playing a different character in that movie. That brings us back to the top, since Margaret Lockwood was the female lead in both “The Lady Vanishes” and “Night Train to Munich,” but played two different characters.

