As the annual march, with its dozens of floats and some 20,000 participants, proceeds down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan in a celebration of lesbian, gay, transgender and bisexual pride on Sunday, thousands of New York City police officers will be spread among the crowd.
Some will be on the streets in uniform, others in plain clothes. Officers will be posted on rooftops along the route and even on boats in the Hudson River, standing by as marchers approach the endpoint, in Greenwich Village.
“You will be safe,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said, speaking of the gay pride march at a news conference at the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Community Center on Thursday. “You will be protected.”
But the plans for a heightened security presence, amplified after the mass killings this month inside a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., have highlighted a rift between the police and some in the gay community over the very definition of “security.” It is a disagreement, activists said, that is rooted in a turbulent history, which has left some lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people feeling disrespected and marginalized by the police force, rather than protected by it.
After the Orlando shootings, the Police Department in New York stepped up its presence, deploying officers armed with long guns at gay landmarks and gathering places, such as the Stonewall Inn in the West Village. Officials said the response, similar to their handling of events like the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade or Pope Francis's visit last year, was meant to reassure people as well as protect them.
“Nothing about that made me feel safe,” said Fred Ginyard, the director of organizing for Fierce, a group focused on supporting young lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender minority members. “If anything, the only thing that came to mind was, ‘This gun is so big you have to hold it with two hands.' The only thing you're doing is shooting someone, killing a person, and that is terrifying.”
During a vigil attended by thousands outside the Stonewall Inn, jeers and calls to “end police brutality” drowned out Police Commissioner William J. Bratton as he tried to speak. And last week, the Audre Lorde Project, an organization focused on social justice for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender minorities and named for the civil rights activist, condemned the “militarization of our mourning.” The group urged gay people to turn to “each other for community safety rather than relying on systems that were never meant for us.”
But Commissioner Bratton, who will march behind the Police Department Band with his wife on Sunday, has pushed back, defending his department and its place safeguarding the city and its gay residents. “I'm sorry, we're here to protect you,” he said. “One way we can protect you is by having police visibility to prevent an act from occurring.
“We are here,” the commissioner added, “and we are committed to being here to protect everybody in this city, and that means everybody.”
The parade has over time become a free-spirited event, buoyed in recent years by the legalization of same-sex marriage. But the organizers of the march and other NYC Pride events acknowledged tensions between some participants and the police. The march itself began after the rebellion at the Stonewall Inn, an uprising sparked by police harassment almost 50 years ago.
Over the past three decades, organizers said, they have forged a better relationship with the Police Department and worked closely with them in discussions on security before the march, which drew an estimated 1.6 million people last year. This year, with a larger crowd expected, the police said the bigger deployment was necessary.
“We know that it can be intimidating for people to see that kind of weaponry at an event,” said James Fallarino, a spokesman for NYC Pride, which organized the weeklong events that culminate with the march. “But we are counting on the Police Department to do the best job they can to protect all of our guests.”
Today, police officials say, the department has evolved into a far different organization than what it was five decades ago. Gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender officers serve openly, and training at the Police Academy and throughout the department now includes lessons on how to act with awareness and sensitivity.
In 2012, in a move hailed as a victory by activists, the Police Department changed its patrol guide to require officers to refer to transgender people by their preferred names and pronouns, and to abide by their gender identity when housing them. It also prohibits officers from strip-searching a person to determine their gender.
On Thursday, city officials showed off a police sport utility vehicle that was outfitted with rainbow stripes and a marquee scrolling the words, “NYPD OUT AND PROUD.” Mayor de Blasio called the vehicle “a real act of solidarity.”
“We have traveled in a space of a few decades to a point now where this N.Y.P.D. not only has hundreds of L.G.B.T. officers but regards itself as here to protect the L.G.B.T. community from any discrimination or hate crimes,” he said. “That's a sea change.”
Activists say a sizable segment of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population has been excluded in that wave of progress, particularly transgender or gender-nonconforming minorities, and those who come from poor backgrounds.
It is a population troubled by high levels of homelessness, poverty and violence, and one that remains suspicious of the authorities, researchers have found. Its members claim that they are routinely profiled by the police, or have interactions where they are misidentified in terms of gender, harassed or left feeling belittled.
“There has been some improvement,” Kevin Nadal, the executive director of the Center for Lesbian, Gay, Transgender, Bisexual and Queer Studies at the City University of New York, said. “But I don't think there's any improvement that shows what ideal policing looks like.”
Some groups, like the Audre Lorde Project, are trying to minimalize the role of the police, by providing their own security for events and training people to spot trouble and de-escalate situations. “We see this as a moment of understanding the role of safety defined by community,” said Cara Page, its executive director.
“In a lot of neighborhoods, we're not going to call the cops anyway,” she said. “If there's a conflict, we are really looking at other ways to interrupt that conflict without needing to put anyone in prison.”
On Sunday, teams of so-called cop watchers will be deployed around the parade route, aiming cameras at the police and recording their interactions.
Yul-san Liem, a co-director of the Justice Committee, usually patrols with a team in Queens, around Jackson Heights, Corona and Elmhurst. But on Sunday, she will push her way through the crowds at the parade.
“It's super important for there to be people who are out, being vigilant, watching the cops,” she said, “ready to capture it if anything goes down.”

