Hillary Clinton has officially started her search for a running mate, and no potential candidate has evoked more speculation, and, depending on who is asked, wistfulness or dread, than Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.
Last week, Ms. Warren had a secret meeting in her Washington condominium with James Hamilton, the lawyer leading the Clinton campaign’s vetting of potential vice-presidential candidates, according to two Democrats briefed on the conversation who requested anonymity to discuss a private conversation.
While the selection of Ms. Warren could help mollify liberal supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, there are ample reasons a Clinton-Warren ticket is unlikely to come to fruition.
Although they have tried to display sisterly solidarity in recent days, Mrs. Clinton and Ms. Warren have had a frosty relationship in the past.
In Ms. Warren’s 2004 book, “The Two-Income Trap: Why Middle-Class Parents Are Going Broke,” written with her daughter, Amelia Warren Tyagi, she all but accused Mrs. Clinton, then a senator from New York, of being owned by Wall Street. As first lady, Mrs. Clinton had opposed legislation that would have made it harder for consumers to use the protection of bankruptcy laws to absolve debt. “As New York’s newest senator, however, it seems that Hillary Clinton could not afford such a principled position,” Ms. Warren wrote. “Campaigns cost money, and that money wasn’t coming from families in financial trouble.”
In the book, she also portrays Mrs. Clinton as bossy toward staff members — an accusation the loyal aides who work for her have been particularly defensive about. Ms. Warren describes one meeting in which “Mrs. Clinton snapped her head sharply to the side and called to no one in particular ‘Where’s lunch? I’m hungry.’”
She also described Mrs. Clinton’s aides cattily discussing a congresswoman’s neon-red jacket and whether it made her “look too pasty.”
Mrs. Clinton’s major strength (and Donald J. Trump’s potentially lethal weakness) is support among female voters, so she doesn’t need to choose a running mate who could help generate enthusiasm among women.
Rather, Mrs. Clinton needs to improve her standing with white male voters, who remain reluctant to embrace her. In 2008, the Barack Obama campaign eased concerns about the first black nominee of a major party by choosing Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. to reach out to white working-class men and to balance a groundbreaking ticket. A similar dynamic could be at play as Mrs. Clinton makes her choice.
Selecting Ms. Warren would not deliver any particular political advantage. Mrs. Clinton, 68, and Ms. Warren, 67, don’t represent any key demographics, like Latinos, blacks or young voters, that Democrats will need in the fall. And unlike Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, or Senators Tim Kaine or Mark Warner, both of Virginia, Ms. Warren represents Massachusetts, not a traditional swing state that she could help deliver in the fall.
Mrs. Clinton’s center-left principles and consensus-oriented approach to politics would not necessarily mesh well with those of Ms. Warren, who is more of an advocate than a politician. What’s more, fiery speeches against the forces of concentrated wealth, Ms. Warren’s stock in trade, may not be what Mrs. Clinton has in mind during a campaign in which captains of industry are fleeing from Mr. Trump and seeking safety with the Democrats.
In perhaps the most telling sign that Ms. Warren won’t win the No. 2 spot, former President Bill Clinton is expected to co-host a five-figure fund-raiser in New York in August with the vice-presidential nominee, according to a fund-raiser involved in the planning. Although an aide said such an event was not currently on Mr. Clinton’s schedule, it’s just the sort of event a running mate is required to do and that would be awkward with Ms. Warren, who has made enemies of many of the New York financiers who could afford such a fund-raiser.
The job of both running for vice president and serving as vice president is by its nature a supporting role. Were Mrs. Clinton to tap Ms. Warren, the nominee-in-waiting would risk selecting a figure who could overshadow her on the campaign trail. But it is not only Ms. Warren’s dynamism that could prove risky: The Massachusetts senator also has her own national following, her own loyal advisers and her own well-thought-out worldview. Mrs. Clinton surely would be uneasy about creating a rival power center in her administration of the sort Ms. Warren could bring to the West Wing.

