A laborer was packing up his van in Manhattan, done for the day last August, when he saw a man approach the nearby bus stop.
“You just missed the bus,” the laborer called out to him.
That simple greeting was all the man at the bus stop seems to have needed. Something about the laborer, or the greeting, may have suggested opportunity.
They chatted. The man at the bus stop volunteered that he worked in immigration law. The laborer perked up at this. He was an illegal immigrant, living in the Bronx with his wife and their three children, and wanted to live here legally.
The laborer invited the man at the bus stop to his home, and they left together in the van. The man said his name was Saul Roberto. “I can get you an extended visa,” he told the family, according to a criminal complaint filed in the Bronx. “I'm a sponsor. I'm an attorney at law, and I'm a film producer.”
He was none of those things.
His name was Robert Byrd, prosecutors said. He was 63 at the time, according to the authorities, a con man with a history of schemes spanning decades and regions of the country, as well as an array of aliases, props and promises — and a knack for getting people to open their wallets.
“The man is good at what he does,” one of his victims, a builder in Illinois, said last week. “He knows how to talk to you.”
Mr. Byrd lived in Las Vegas in his younger years. In 1999, an 80-year-old woman living there answered her telephone, and the caller introduced himself as Mike Singleton, from an organization called Children's Advocates and Society for the Handicapped, or CASH, according to a criminal complaint in Nevada. He asked for a donation to help fill baskets for needy children at Thanksgiving. The woman agreed, and later that day, a man who said he was from the organization and identified himself as Paul Stevens stopped by to collect her $500 donation.
In fact, both men — the one on the phone and the one at her door — were Robert Byrd. Using the two aliases, he continued to call and to visit, seeking more donations and offering rewards for the woman's generosity — a hotel room in Hawaii, special recognition as a CASH “sponsor” — that never materialized. As Mike Singleton, he told her over the phone that he was a Vietnam veteran who used a wheelchair and needed money for surgery. She gave him $1,200, according to the complaint.
Over the course of two months, Mr. Byrd called and visited dozens of times, collecting tens of thousands of dollars from the woman until he was arrested in 2000, according to the complaint. He was indicted under yet another name, Thomas Marquis.
He pleaded guilty to theft from a person over 65 and was sentenced to probation in 2004.
Two years later, he appeared almost 2,000 miles from Las Vegas, in Bourbonnais, Ill., outside Chicago. Gone was the name Thomas Marquis, and gone was any mention of Vietnam or a wheelchair.
“He pulls up in a big old limo,” recalled the homebuilder, who met him at one of his construction sites in 2006. Stepping out of a limousine while a driver waited inside, he introduced himself as Samuel Byrd and said he was interested in buying the house. He was a concert promoter, he said, and was planning a series of seven shows for Mariah Carey and others, something he called the “Divas Tour.”
The builder, who asked that his name be withheld because he was the victim of a crime, kept in touch with Mr. Byrd, who invited him to invest in his musical endeavors.
The builder did, with success.
“I was $30,000 into him, and I got $50,000 back,” he recalled. “I was getting some returns. That's how he was so good.”
When Ms. Carey performed a concert in Chicago, Mr. Byrd sent tickets to the builder's family and had them driven to the show in his limo.
Mr. Byrd's requests for large sums from the builder continued, but the returns stopped, Illinois prosecutors charged. The builder called the police and accused Mr. Byrd of taking more than $100,000 from him.
At trial in Kankakee County in 2010, Mr. Byrd acted as his own lawyer. It was a monthlong affair likened in press accounts to a circus. The defendant, who at one court appearance said he had mooned President Nixon while working in the congressional post office, claimed before the jury to have performed with the band Kool & the Gang. He promised to call Mariah Carey as a witness. He did not.
Prosecutors said Mr. Byrd had gambled with the money he had taken. A jury convicted him of theft, but he was released shortly after, having spent more than three years behind bars since being arrested.
“I come to find out he was renting the limo,” the builder said. “I talked to the limo driver. He told me he swindled him, too.”
Six years later, he was at a humble city bus stop when he met the laborer. No limo.
Mr. Byrd knew from personal experience that his schemes sometimes required planning. This one appears to have started quite by chance.
By day's end, Mr. Byrd had left the laborer's apartment with $430 in exchange for a promise to help. Months passed, with Mr. Byrd describing legal fees and other unforeseen costs, and the laborer's family borrowed money to pay him, said Michelle Milanes, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx who works in the office's new Immigrant Affairs Unit.
“This man was calling them daily,” Ms. Milanes said.
The laborer knew a police officer he had met when his sons joined a Law Enforcement Explorers program, and he called him last year. They met in Brooklyn at Floyd Bennett Field, near where the officer, Timothy Craft, was in training.
“They were very emotional about the whole situation,” Officer Craft said of the family on Friday. “I advised him to stop paying him immediately, that it was a scam.”
After Officer Craft directed the laborer to prosecutors, Mr. Byrd was arrested last month and charged with stealing $106,000. He is in jail while the case proceeds.
His identity may have changed from state to state, but he kept traces of his past, too. A cellphone he used in New York had a Las Vegas area code. And he may have been thinking back to his trial in Illinois when he told the laborer about his legal work.
“I'm not a lawyer,” he told the police last month. “I'm well versed in the law.”

