Not everything belongs in the cloud.
The boisterous throng of Brooklyn Tech students streaming down a side street in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, on a recent Friday afternoon may not believe it, but Jonna Twigg does. It's the guiding principle behind her store, Twigg's Bindery, at 85 Fort Greene Place, a purveyor of handmade journals, notebooks and albums, that the teenagers pass on their way to and from school.
On a quiet Sunday two days later, Ms. Twigg mused that she ought to make a flag with the cloud motto on it. In the age of Snapchat and Instagram, she sees books like the ones she sells as a place for words and images that are “private, intimate, intentional.”
“Some things,” she said, “should go into the tactile realm.”
In 2007, Ms. Twigg, now 35, began the business in her home on Clinton Avenue, selling to private clients. In 2014, she moved the bindery to its current location, a two-story building on a tree-lined block anchored by the high school. A year later, she opened to the public. “Nobody ever saw the doors open,” she explained, nodding toward the open entryway, as birdsong and a breeze flowed in. For many years, Ms. Twigg said, a painter had occupied the space. Now it attracts the curious. “People walk in and say, ‘What's going on here? Are these books for sale?'”
They are. Ms. Twigg's books come in a rainbow of vivid, solid-color fabrics and rich brown leathers, accented along the spine with her distinctive exposed binding: waxed embroidery floss stitched in a zigzag along the top and bottom, with staggered vertical stripes in the center, each of which corresponds to a “signature,” or gathering of paper, contained between the covers. The priciest leather-bound book sells for $250. An album — for wedding photos, perhaps — can cost $600. Ms. Twigg's modest notebooks are $10 each.
An active workshop fills the center of the airy room. Cutting mats, X-acto knives, rulers and scissors on a table, and a long, high shelf filled with paper and spools of thread tell of the craft behind the objects. “Just seeing the materials, it just unlocks so much for people,” Ms. Twigg said. “It opens up conversation.”
On weeknights, the bindery hosts book discussion groups organized by Greenlight Bookstore, two blocks away on Fulton Street. This spring, Ms. Twigg began offering weekend classes in bookbinding, leather crafts and felt-toy making.
On this Sunday, Junghwa Park, a 26-year-old artist, led a class on embroidery. It was a quiet affair. Her students were two friends in from Long Island: Leslie Jacob, 57, and Susan Feltman-O'Sullivan, who is older but wouldn't say by how much. The women, avid knitters, were new to this kind of needlework. They had recently purchased plain quilted maps of New York City and had decided to embellish them with landmarks, such as Radio City Music Hall.
“I want to add beads to the marquee to give it dimension,” Ms. Jacob, an office manager in Manhattan, said.
Ms. Feltman-O'Sullivan, an adjunct professor of linguistics at Molloy College, St. John's University and other institutions, and a lifelong New Yorker, thought of a simpler starting point. “We'll do the subway first,” she suggested, “so we can make mistakes.”
But Ms. Jacob, originally from Columbia, S.C., continued to dream big. She moved to New York 10 years ago; the embroidery project was an incentive to get out more and explore the city. Each place the women visited would be added to the quilts. “When we get really good, we're going to Fifth Avenue,” she said.
Ms. Twigg seemed pleased.

