PARIS — After record rainfall and near-historic flooding this spring, life along the Seine is returning to normal. Tourist boats are again cruising the river. The Louvre and the Musée d'Orsay have reopened. Riverside restaurants and nightclubs are back in business.
So this is a moment for Paris to celebrate the charms and secrets of the slow-moving waterway that both divides and unites the city.
On the same day early this month that the Seine rose to its highest level in Paris (20 feet above normal), an exhibition on the river's islands opened at the Pavillon de l'Arsenal on the Right Bank.
The show, which runs until Oct. 2 in this small architectural center, may be low-tech — no interactive experiences, no multilingual audio guides — but it is overflowing with stories.
Centuries ago, more than 300 islands dotted the 482-mile-long Seine, from its source on an obscure plain in northeast Burgundy to its terminus on the Normandy coast. Because of human intervention and the forces of nature, only 117 survive.
“Islands of the Seine” features 32 of those islands. They form a scattered archipelago of industry, culture, habitation and recreation that has been documented by artists like Monet and Van Gogh and by novelists like Zola and Flaubert.
“The islands are like a pearl necklace of nature decorating the river,” said Milena Charbit, an architect who is the curator of the exhibition, which stemmed from her master's thesis. “Each pearl has its own life, its own identity. There are islands of imagination that never existed and islands that are no more.”
The two most famous — Île de la Cité and the smaller Île Saint-Louis — are in the center of Paris, where the city originated in ancient times.
Île Saint-Louis would become one of the first examples of urban planning in France, with elegant townhouses and mansions built in the 17th century. In a nod to modernity, some looked outward toward the Seine, rather than inward toward courtyards and interior streets.
Most of the old neighborhoods on Île de la Cité were demolished by Baron Haussmann, the 19th-century prefect of the Seine department, as part of his rebuilding of Paris in the name of progress. He expropriated and razed medieval houses to build a new headquarters for the Paris Guard and the Fire Brigade, a massive structure still occupied by the Paris police. (Thankfully, the Cathedral of Notre-Dame and the Conciergerie were not on his list.)
On the southwest edge of Paris is Île Seguin, home for most of the 20th century to the automaker Renault, which built what would become the largest factory in France there, with 30,000 employees. (During World War II, it produced trucks for the occupying Germans and was the target of allied bombings.)
The factory was closed in 1992, and its buildings razed in 2004 and 2005 following extensive soil decontamination and asbestos removal. The French architect Jean Nouvel is directing a sustainable development project for the island that will include offices, shops, transportation and recreational activities, and will feature green roofs and the reuse of rainwater.
Île de la Grande Jatte to the west of Paris was the subject of Georges Seurat's pointillist masterpiece “A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte.” The painting was the inspiration for the Sondheim musical “Sunday in the Park with George;” Sesame Street and The Simpsons have parodied it; Playboy once featured a version of the painting on its cover.
Other islands have more obscure stories.
About 60 miles southeast of Paris is Île Olive, which was once owned by a certain Doctor Olive, mayor of the local commune in the 1880s. When he died, his widow bequeathed it to the nearby town, and the island is now a wooded park with a nature trail.It can be neither sold nor rented; the sale of refreshments is banned, and no structures can be erected there
Île des Cygnes, which no longer exists, got its name after Louis XIV populated the island entirely with swans. And not just any swans — his were a special variety imported from Denmark. (The swan, considered pure and regal, was the Sun King's favorite animal.)
Then there is Île aux Cygnes, site of the mini-Statue of Liberty, on the river not far from the Eiffel Tower.
Île du Platais became a gathering place in the mid-20th century for “naturists” who passed their time relaxing and engaging in various activities wearing minimal clothing. Île Saint-Étienne, by contrast, was the site of a maximum-security prison.
The show also recalls the era when the Seine was clean enough to swim in. A life-size black-and-white cardboard photo montage shows 10 champion swimmers from the early 20th century.
But industrial and human waste polluted the waters and swimming was banned in 1923. The river is cleaner than it once was, and many species of fish have returned. If Paris wins the bid for the 2024 Olympic Games, Mayor Anne Hidalgo fantasizes that the city will host some of the swimming events in the Seine.
The Pavillon de l'Arsenal is not the only Paris museum to focus on the Seine this spring. “The Open-Air Studio: Impressionists in Normandy,” an exhibit at the Musée Jacquemart-André until July 25, explores the region of Normandy as the birthplace of impressionism. It includes paintings made in and around Rouen, the Seine port city that offered, according to Pissarro, “the most splendid landscape that a painter could ever dream of.”
Even better is the retrospective show “Albert Marquet, Painter of Time Pending,” at the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. The exhibit, which continues until Aug. 21, pulls together 100 paintings and drawings by Marquet (1875-1947), some on view for the first time in France. A close friend of Matisse, Marquet was fascinated by the movements, colors and shadows of water, and spent much of his life traveling between the Mediterranean and the Seine. The show includes a room on “Paris, La Seine,” with a series of paintings done in muted tones of grays and browns.
Then there is “Le Pont-Neuf, la nuit,” a rendering of Paris' oldest, longest and widest bridge at night, which Marquet painted in 1935 and revised four years later. It was the view he saw looking across the western edge of Île de la Cité from his sixth-floor apartment at the corner of the Rue Dauphine and the Quai des Grands-Augustins. The sky and water are black, the bridge and the cars crossing it wet with rain, shimmering in the glow of yellow and red electric lights. To the north, La Samaritaine department store, currently closed as part of an ambitious redevelopment project, reigns over the scene like a golden palace with a bright red crown.
The nocturnal magic of the painting can mesmerize even the most casual museum-goer. It cries out for a visit to the real thing: The Pont Neuf late at night.
The bridge also holds a secret: Behind an equestrian statute of Henri IV are two flights of stairs. They lead down to the Square du Vert-Galant, a spit of land at the westernmost tip of the island. I sometimes come here to draw energy from the river and its elaborated banks.
To my right is the Louvre, the dome of the Institut de France on my left, the river on both sides and straight ahead. From here, the Seine cloaks the city in shadows and offers it to me.

