ELKHART LAKE, Wis. — Sebastien Bourdais speaks reverently about the 24 Hours of Le Mans race in his native France, as if some mythical force has a hand in the competition.
“I don’t know what’s the criteria,” Bourdais said. “All I can tell you is Le Mans picks its winner.”
If that is the case, this year, the race finally picked him.
After the memorable trip back to France, Bourdais returned this weekend to the IndyCar series, which was back at the four-plus mile Road America course for the first time since 2007 for Sunday’s Kohler Grand Prix. His class victory at Le Mans on June 19 was his first win in 11 tries on his home track.
“For me, it’s been a long time coming, trying to chase this one for quite some time,” Bourdais said here on Friday about Le Mans.
In that race, he teamed with Joey Hand and Dirk Müller in the No. 68 Ford Chip Ganassi Racing Ford GT on a day that was memorable for his team for another reason — the 50th anniversary of Ford’s podium sweep at Le Mans in 1966.
“It’s kind of the European version of the Indy 500,” said Scott Dixon, part of a team that drove the No. 69 Ford GT to a third-place class finish. “Just really happy for Sebastien. He’s run there many years and come close many times to get that victory.”
Bourdais chose to deflect the attention toward Ford’s milestone.
“As a driver, especially for me, I’m the helper on the team,” Bourdais said. “I’m the third driver. I come for the long races. It’s not your program, so you’re just trying to bring your experience and be a benefactor.”
But it was that experience that made him such a valuable commodity, so much so that he spent his weekend off from the IndyCar circuit and his KVSH Racing No. 11 Chevy to return to Le Mans.
“It was important for them to have him on that team because of his experience at Le Mans,” said Jimmy Vasser, a KVSH co-owner. “He brought a lot to that organization because he’s been there before.”
Similarly, Bourdais was the winner the last time IndyCar raced at Road America, a sprawling, woodsy road course 60 miles north of Milwaukee.
He qualified in the front row in each of his four previous starts at Road America in the CART series, including poles in 2004 and 2007. Bourdais has finished on the podium each time, including his first-place finish nine years ago. He is the only current IndyCar driver to have won at the course.
“I really cherish this place,” Bourdais said, calling it the best track in the United States. “It’s kept its identity over the years.”
He arrived at Elkhart Lake with momentum. Before Le Mans, Bourdais earned his first IndyCar victory of the year on June 4 at Belle Isle, in Detroit.
There was a slight hiccup, though, after the early practice on Friday. The tires on his No. 11 car were getting beaten up, he said, although it was not necessarily a tire problem.
“We were definitely struggling a little bit,” Bourdais said. “We’ve got some work to do. We’ll see how we can bounce back.”
Simon Pagenaud, who led the IndyCar standings ahead of Sunday’s race, had the fastest time in the early practice around Road America, with a speed of 139.644 miles per hour. Bourdais, who was 14th in the standings, placed 15th in the first practice, at 138.025.
At Le Mans, Pagenaud rooted for his fellow Frenchman Bourdais. They were teammates at Le Mans in 2011 in a car that finished second.
“It’s pretty cool to see him do it, as a Frenchman in Le Mans,” Pagenaud said.

