BUFFALO — The Rangers, without a pick in the first two rounds of the N.H.L. entry draft, made six selections on Day 2 and acquired Colorado defenseman Nick Holden.
General Manager Jeff Gorton said that the team had tried to move up from its first pick, the 81st over all, which the Rangers used to select Sean Day, a defenseman in the Ontario Hockey League, but that no deals had emerged.
“We were close on a few things,” Gorton said.
Gorton hinted that the Rangers could be active during the coming week. The Rangers entered the draft looking to find salary-cap space via trades, but they decided only to send a fourth-round pick next year to the Avalanche for Holden.
Holden, 29, would replace Keith Yandle, a pending free agent whose rights were traded in the past week to the Florida Panthers, who then signed Yandle to a seven-year contract.
Instead, the Rangers will focus on potential deals and on signing free agents to bolster a roster that fell in the first round of this spring’s playoffs to the Pittsburgh Penguins, the eventual Stanley Cup winners. It was the Rangers’ earliest postseason exit since 2011.
“Things can happen, and they can happen quick,” Gorton said of the impending free-agent marketplace. “We have to figure out where we need to be.”
Day, 18, who was born in Belgium, had six goals and 16 assists for Mississauga of the O.H.L. He has a reputation as a mobile two-way defenseman.
The Rangers took the Finnish defenseman Tarmo Reunanen in the fourth round, followed by the 6-foot-6 forward Tim Gettinger from Sault Ste. Marie of the O.H.L. in the fifth round. In the sixth round, they took forward Gabriel Fontaine, who scored 20 goals with Rouyn-Noranda of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League, and goaltender Tyler Wall.
The Rangers used their seventh-round pick to select forward Ty Ronning, who scored 31 goals for Vancouver of the Western Hockey League last season. He is the son of the former N.H.L. player Cliff Ronning.
The Islanders, after selecting left wing Kieffer Bellows with the 19th overall pick in Friday’s first round, selected four forwards and a defenseman on Saturday.
The Islanders did not have a second-, third- or fifth-round pick. They selected left wings Anatoli Golyshev and Otto Koivula in the fourth round, followed by left wing Collin Adams in the sixth and left wing Nick Pastujov and defenseman David Quenneville in the seventh.
The Devils took center Michael McLeod from Mississauga with the 12th overall pick on Friday, then added his linemate Nathan Bastian in the second round.
In the third round, the Devils chose right wing Joseph Anderson and center Brandon Gignac, followed by left wing Mikhail Maltsev and goaltender Evan Cormier in the fourth round. They added defenseman Yegor Rykov in the fifth, forward Jesper Bratt in the sixth and defenseman Jeremy Davies in the seventh.
The Devils also traded the 77th overall pick to Pittsburgh for forward Beau Bennett, a pending restricted free agent.

