The scoring-starved Devils acquired a former No. 1 overall draft pick, two All-Star defensemen switched places, and one of the N.H.L.’s most prolific scorers indicated he had decided to stay put on a busy Wednesday, two days before the start of the free-agent signing period.
The Devils acquired Taylor Hall, the top pick in the 2010 draft, from the Edmonton Oilers for defenseman Adam Larsson. Montreal sent defenseman P. K. Subban to Nashville for Shea Weber, and Steven Stamkos signed an eight-year contract extension with Tampa Bay.
Hall, who had 132 goals and 196 assists in 381 career games with the Oilers, will provide much-needed scoring punch for the Devils. Last season, he had 26 goals and 39 assists and represented the Oilers in the All-Star Game.
Larsson had three goals and 15 assists while playing in all 82 games last season as part of the Devils’ top defensive pairing.
The biggest trade of the day, however, involved the Canadiens and the Predators.
Subban, who won the Norris Trophy as the N.H.L.’s top defenseman in 2013, had six goals and 45 assists last season before sustaining a neck injury in March.
Montreal General Manager Marc Bergevin said trading Subban was “one of the most difficult decisions” he had had to make.
“We completed today an important transaction, which I am convinced will make the Canadiens a better team,” Bergevin said.
A clause in Subban’s contract that would have allowed him to block any trade was set to kick in on Friday.
Nashville General Manager David Poile praised Subban’s “tremendous skill and contagious energy” and said he would make the Predators a better team now and into the future.
“Superstar defensemen of his caliber are a rare commodity, and we are thrilled to add him to the organization,” Poile said.
Weber, a three-time Norris Trophy finalist, was a team captain and had 20 goals and 31 assists last season for Nashville. He had signed a 14-year, $110 million offer sheet with Philadelphia as a restricted free agent in 2012, but Nashville matched it and kept him.
Bergevin said Weber would improve Montreal’s power play and play a leadership role for the Canadiens.
“He is a complete rear guard with impressive size and a powerful shot,” Bergevin said.
Stamkos, a two-time N.H.L. scoring champion for the Lightning who would have been able to test free agency starting on Friday, wrote on Twitter that he was “excited to be back for 8 more years.”
The deal, worth $68 million, was reached two days before Stamkos would have been able to gauge his worth on the open market. Stamkos, a four-time All-Star with 312 goals, was expected to command far more lucrative offers from numerous bidders, including his hometown Toronto Maple Leafs, the Buffalo Sabres and the Detroit Red Wings.
“It’s not often that a player gets the chance to spend his career in one organization, and I am hopeful that this agreement sets me on that path,” Stamkos said.
The agreement was something of a surprise after Stamkos and the Lightning had been unable to negotiate a contract extension during the season.
His status even loomed over the N.H.L. draft last weekend in Buffalo, where several team executives expressed their interest in making a bid to sign Stamkos. Sabres General Manager Tim Murray was among them and referred to Stamkos as “the big fish.”
But Lightning General Manager Steve Yzerman remained hopeful that a deal could be reached, saying as recently as Saturday that he had not closed the door on re-signing Stamkos.
The Lightning had a slight edge over other teams, however. Under N.H.L. rules, they were allowed to sign Stamkos to an eight-year contract while other teams were limited to making seven-year offers.
Stamkos has topped 40 goals four times. He has won the N.H.L.’s regular-season scoring title twice, including the 2011-12 season, in which he had a career-high 60 goals.
Stamkos is coming off a year in which he had 36 goals and 64 points in 77 games before having surgery on April 4 to treat a blood clot near his right collarbone. Stamkos did not return until he saw limited ice time in Tampa Bay’s 2-1 loss to Pittsburgh in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals.
In other moves, the Sabres signed defenseman Casey Nelson to a two-year contract extension; St. Louis signed forward Kyle Brodziak to a two-year extension; Minnesota re-signed left wing Jason Zucker to a two-year, $4 million contract; and Columbus signed defenseman Seth Jones to a six-year, $32.4 million contract.

