If there is ever a Mount Rushmore created for New Yorkers, the faces on it might reasonably be those of Peter Stuyvesant, Fiorello H. La Guardia, Robert Moses and Felix G. Rohatyn.
In the 1970s, Mr. Rohatyn, an investment banker, engineered the rescues first of the New York Stock Exchange and then of the city itself, which was on the verge of financial collapse. Documents from these episodes, and other stages of his life, including his childhood flight from the Nazis, have been given to the New-York Historical Society by Mr. Rohatyn, 88, and his wife, Elizabeth, a former chairwoman of the New York Public Library.
“It's a small collection but an important collection, and it's great to be associated with him and his family,” said Michael T. Ryan, vice president and director of the Patricia D. Klingenstein Library, the historical society's library, which is preparing the papers for viewing by the public.
The bulk of the collection arrived last week in roughly 20 cardboard boxes, Mr. Ryan said, and includes letters exchanged between Mr. Rohatyn and Presidents Richard M. Nixon, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton; Gov. Hugh L. Carey; Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg; and numerous others. The first wave of papers will be available to the public by the middle of 2017, Mr. Ryan said. Mr. Rohatyn's special assistant, Bill Barrett, is still unearthing more documents.
Mr. Rohatyn spent most of his career as an investment banker at Lazard Frères, where he is credited with elevating the art of corporate mergers and acquisitions. Documents from his work there belong to the firm and are not part of the collection; papers from his corporate practice after Lazard may not be made public for decades because they are still financially sensitive, Mr. Rohatyn's son Nicolas, 56, said. The elder Mr. Rohatyn was unavailable to be interviewed for this article.
Ms. Rohatyn's papers include documents from her tenure at the public library, as founder and chairwoman of the nonprofit Teaching Matters Inc., and from the couple's time at the United States Embassy in Paris, where Mr. Rohatyn served as ambassador to France from 1997 to 2000.
Mr. Rohatyn's papers begin with artifacts from his family's flight from the Nazis, which took him from Vienna to France, then to Casablanca and Lisbon, then Brazil, before he reached New York in 1942.
Under the mentorship of André Meyer, a senior partner at Lazard, Mr. Rohatyn rose quickly at the firm but became best known in the fiscal crisis of the 1970s, when Mr. Carey appointed him to run the Municipal Assistance Corporation, created to help the city restructure $6 billion in short-term debt. Mr. Rohatyn negotiated concessions from the municipal unions, higher subway and bus fares, wholesale layoffs, paid tuition at the City University and other drastic therapies. Most of the corporation papers are at Baruch College, but some will be available at the historical society, Mr. Ryan said.
The society is also acquiring the papers of other players from the days of New York City's financial meltdown, including the lawyer Ira M. Millstein and the real estate investor John E. Zuccotti, both key architects of the bailout. The combined papers, along with audio interviews with some of the participants, will provide detailed insights into the meltdown and recovery, Mr. Ryan said. Nicolas Rohatyn said the family hoped its gift would prompt others to donate their papers from the era as well.
Mr. Rohatyn was given the nickname, not always used as a compliment, of Felix the Fixer. But in a 1978 interview with The Associated Press, he likened his work to that of a surgeon. “I get called when something is broken,” he was quoted as saying. “I'm supposed to operate, fix it up and leave as little blood on the floor as possible.”

