The New York State Athletic Commission has long been a curio of the state's bureaucracy, an odd little agency charged with the considerable responsibility of ensuring the integrity of professional boxing and the safety of fighters who risk harm for entertainment. Mismanagement, patronage and piecemeal corruption pepper its history.
Two years ago, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo appointed David Berlin, a lawyer with an expertise in boxing, to be the athletic commission's executive director. Mr. Berlin's appointment and the creation of the new supervisory position were seen by many as moves to reform the commission — to make it more professional and accountable.
The match did not take: Last month, the Cuomo administration abruptly replaced Mr. Berlin, who, his lawyer says, was removed in retaliation for diligently reporting wrongdoing within the commission.
Mr. Berlin's dismissal is the latest controversy to envelop the athletic commission, whose mandate is broadening as a result of the recent passing of legislation lifting a longtime ban on competitive mixed martial arts. The agency is also under investigation by the state inspector general's office and is the subject of several lawsuits related to a catastrophic boxing match at Madison Square Garden in 2013.
The commission's problematic history is stated as fact in an internal review conducted by the New York State Department in 2013. The New York Times filed a Freedom of Information request for that document in December, only to receive a heavily redacted version last month. By that time, The Times had already obtained an unredacted version, allowing a comparison to determine what the Cuomo administration deemed not worthy of public dissemination.
Among the blacked-out portions:
“The past investigations and reviews demonstrate that the Commission has a history of inconsistent management and recurring lapses in administrative functions, event operations and internal controls.”
The State Department, which oversees the athletic commission, declined to explain the decision to relieve Mr. Berlin, saying that it does not comment on personnel matters. But Mr. Berlin has answered the department's silence by releasing a letter — single spaced, four pages — that he wrote to the governor and which both lays out some of his reform efforts and expresses dismay over his abrupt dismissal.
Mr. Berlin wrote that he had been summoned on May 13 by a top official in the secretary of state's office and informed that he was no longer the athletic commission's executive director. When he asked why, he wrote, he was told that “too much turmoil” had occurred during his two years at the commission, although the official declined to offer specifics.
Mr. Berlin told the governor that much of the turmoil had existed before his arrival and that he had spent his tenure trying to bring standards of excellence and accountability “to a regulatory body that has for too long been mired in incompetence, petty corruption, abuse of authority, and acceptance of the status quo.”
Governor Cuomo has not responded to the letter from Mr. Berlin, an appointee whose “wealth of knowledge” about boxing the governor praised just two years ago.
Mr. Berlin said in an interview that he had been disappointed but not surprised by his removal. “I care about boxing, and I care about the boxers, and I try to do what's right for the sport,” he said. “But I'm somebody who fights for what he thinks is proper. Probably, in that sense, I wasn't the person they wanted there.”
The problems with the agency go way back, as laid out in the heavily redacted document produced by the State Department:
A 1986 investigation prompted by allegations of the mishandling of postfight urine tests. A 1987 investigation that found theft resulting from weak management and a lack of internal controls. A 2000 investigation that ultimately found a Pandora's box of problems, including the “improper handling of conflicts of interest.”
Lawyers at the State Department redacted most of a reference to an audit, conducted in 2007, that found “inadequate internal controls” in the athletic commission's collection of revenue from licensing fees.
Also redacted were dozens of findings and recommendations that, when taken as a whole, suggest a profoundly dysfunctional agency. Among the blacked-out recommendations: the appointment of an executive director, rather than having the athletic commission managed by its chairman.
The last sentence redacted by the State Department was in the internal report's conclusion:
“It is clear that many of the problems and shortcomings identified in past investigations and audits of the State Athletic Commission continue to exist today.”
Freedom of Information laws allow government employees to keep private their opinions and recommendations in internal documents like this. But the law also requires that statistical or factual information, as well as final agency policy or decisions, be disclosed.
Robert J. Freeman, the executive director of the New York State Committee on Open Government, read both the redacted and unredacted versions of the State Department's report on the athletic commission. His opinion: “While the law permits an agency to withhold portions of internal documents consisting of advice or recommendations, it requires disclosure of factual information. Various elements of the report that were redacted reflect facts and findings, particularly those relating to determinations indicating deficiencies or weaknesses.”
The report was issued on Nov. 1, 2013. The next day, a televised heavyweight match at Madison Square Garden left a Russian boxer, Magomed Abdusalamov, then 32, with a brain injury so severe that he remains speechless and partially paralyzed.
As a result, the inspector general has spent more than two years examining the commission's operations and protocols, focusing in part on the medical attention received by Mr. Abdusalamov in the hour after the fight. Increasingly woozy from an undetected subdural hematoma, or a buildup of blood that puts pressure on the brain, that was developing in his skull, Mr. Abdusalamov was told to take a cab to the hospital. He vomited on the sidewalk while members of his entourage frantically tried to find a taxi, and he suffered a stroke soon after reaching St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.
Depositions taken as part of the inspector general's investigation — as well as portions of the lawsuits filed by the Abdusalamov family's lawyer against the athletic commission, its doctors and other officials — have portrayed the commission as a troubled agency fraught with mismanagement, internal squabbling and blurred lines of propriety.
For example, the commission's chairwoman at the time, Melvina Lathan, acknowledged that she had accepted a Christmas gift of earrings from a boxing promoter and that people in the commission had also received gifts, including a box of wine.
While the inspector general's office was conducting its investigation into the commission, Governor Cuomo appointed Mr. Berlin as its executive director in March 2014, effectively replacing Ms. Lathan, as the agency's administrative force. Ms. Lathan, however, remained with the commission for another year, collecting an annual salary of $101,600 for what was effectively a part-time job.
Mr. Berlin, 52, had worked as a criminal defense lawyer in the Bronx for the Legal Aid Society for a decade before opening a private practice. Over the years, he represented many clients in the boxing world, and he even managed a couple of boxers.
He quickly set his sights on reforming the commission. He fought to have the most competent referees and judges at boxing matches, developed comprehensive procedures to be followed by boxing inspectors and ringside physicians, ensured that those physicians — who previously worked as independent contractors — became state employees, and started an initiative to enroll fighters and others in the sport in health insurance plans.
In his letter to the governor, Mr. Berlin said that he had tried to change the culture by refusing to participate in what had been accepted commission practice. If a gift basket was sent to the office, he returned it or donated it to a charity. When a referee sent him a book, he sent back a check as payment. When a promoter sent a tray of baked goods to the shiva for Mr. Berlin's father, he took the tray to a homeless center.
But Mr. Berlin also laid out the resistance he encountered in trying to change a calcified system.
When he needed to hire a director of boxing, he wrote, he chose an applicant who came with strong recommendations and a knowledge of boxing but was told by Anthony Giardina, the executive deputy secretary of state, that “Chamber is looking for their own person” — a reference to the governor's office. Mr. Giardina, he said, also acknowledged that this person would most likely know nothing about boxing.
Mr. Berlin said he had fought successfully for the hiring of the qualified candidate. “But my failure to silently abide by a course that I believed was wrong for the Commission is part of the ‘turmoil,' which Mr. Giardina cited as the reason for my dismissal.”
Mr. Berlin also wrote that in answering questions posed by the inspector general, he had reported that Tom Hoover, the chairman of the boxing commission, had put his son on the commission's credentials list under a pseudonym so that he could attend two boxing events — at Madison Square Garden and at Barclays Center — free of charge. That action, he wrote, surely contributed to the “turmoil” as well.
According to his letter, Mr. Berlin was told that he was being transferred immediately to the Office of General Counsel — a position for which he was not qualified — and would no longer have anything to do with the athletic commission. He said this move was designed “to give the false impression to the public that it was somehow my decision.”
“Boxers deserve better, and the sport deserves better,” Mr. Berlin concluded. “Turning a blind eye to corruption, handing out assignments in order to avoid complaints, silently accepting edicts that are wrong for the sport and for the Commission — these may be ways to avoid ‘turmoil,' but they do not move the sport forward and do not protect the interests of boxers.”
In responding to a request for comment, a spokesman for the State Department wrote in an email that the department and the athletic commission “do not comment on personnel decisions, matters pertaining to open investigations, or matters for which litigation has been threatened.”
The State Department had declined to provide further comment earlier this week, but after this article appeared online Thursday, the governor's office issued a statement by the State Department saying that its decision was warranted.

