A block of charred wood wrapped in rope sat at the entrance of Rick Kelly's guitar shop in the West Village. He carted it from the scorched site of the Serbian Orthodox cathedral destroyed in a fire in the Flatiron district last month.
“I had to do some fast talking to get it,” he said, explaining how he reassured a suspicious police officer that he had gotten an O.K. from the monsignor of the historic church. “They would have thrown it away in the ocean.”
When old wood becomes available in the city, Mr. Kelly appears. He builds guitars from what he calls the “bones” of New York: centuries-aged pine planks from establishments like Chumley's, the Chelsea Hotel and squalid former Bowery saloons like McGurk's Suicide Hall. Bob Dylan has played his instruments, as have the guitarists Marc Ribot and Bill Frisell. Lou Reed performed some of his final concerts with a guitar made from Bowery wood.
“Dylan had to have a guitar with wood from Chumley's because he used to drink there,” Mr. Kelly said. “He later wanted to know if beer he spilled on the floor at Chumley's might have ended up in his guitar.”
Lenny Kaye, Patti Smith's longtime guitarist, plays a Telecaster-style guitar Mr. Kelly made for him, the “Bowerycaster,” created with wood from 183 Bowery. “For a longtime New Yorker like myself, to actually play on a piece of wood that has been in a loft or flophouse on the Bowery inspires me,” Mr. Kaye said. “I think of that wood plank being part of a ceiling for 150 years, predating air-conditioning, and how it swelled during the summer.”
“You can feel the hopes and desperations of the people that lined the Bowery,” he added. “I like to think about how it waited years to become my little buddy. When I drive past that address, I always think ‘Yeah, baby. That's where you're from. That's where you were born.'”
Mr. Kelly's shop, Carmine Street Guitars, has slow-turning ceiling fans, and customers trickle in to play licks and talk shop. Dusty logs are heaped against a wall, marked in chalk with designations of origin such as “Bowery: 1850s” and “McGurk's.”
Mr. Kelly, 66, does not use a cellphone and spends afternoons working in piles of sawdust alongside Cindy Hulej, 24, his assistant and apprentice. His 90-year-old mother, Dorothy, is the shop's bookkeeper and works at a lamp-lit cluttered desk.
But the shop's sleepy affectations belie the mischief of his work. Mr. Kelly's wood-collecting missions are often adventurous and improbable.
When he got a tip a few years ago that the Chelsea Hotel was throwing away piles of timber, he sent a friend early one morning to rescue them off the street. Another time, a benefactor showed up with a truck in front of Mr. Kelly's shop: He had amassed tons of wood from defunct haunts like Sammy's Bowery Follies. Recently, Mr. Kelly and Ms. Hulej visited the shuttered Pearl Paint store in Chinatown at night to peer through its windows and consider its wood.
Mr. Kelly now gets tips about old wood around the city so frequently he can't follow them all. “‘Hey, Kelly, there's this Dumpster I saw with all this wood,'” he said, imitating a typical pitch. “And it kills me. I have so much already that I can't take it.” But two establishments still elude him, and he would welcome hunks of their interiors: McSorley's Old Ale House and CBGB, which is now a John Varvatos boutique.
“I have a guy who knows Varvatos,” he said. “He says he's going to look into getting me a log. I'm still working on the bartenders at McSorley's. I just want a few logs from the basement. I keep telling them I can replace them with something just as strong.” They seem unconvinced, he added.
Mr. Kelly was born in Jamaica, Queens, and grew up on Long Island. He carved his first guitar from a cigar box in high school and began building instruments from reclaimed wood in his early 20s.
“It was cheaper,” he said, explaining that he started making guitars to pay for college. “I used to be embarrassed about it. ‘Hey, your guitar once used to be a table.' I didn't want people to know that.”
But his peculiarities became his signature when he moved to New York in 1976, opening a shop on Downing Street. He eventually drew a celebrity clientele.
“David Bowie came in,” he recalled. “He was only wearing khakis. He wanted a fretless bass.”
He disclosed of Lou Reed: “He liked his guitars super-light because he had a bad shoulder.”
Mr. Kelly opened his current storefront on Carmine Street in 1990, but his relationship with New York wood took on a higher calling, he said, only when he crossed paths with the film director Jim Jarmusch a decade ago. Mr. Jarmusch, who played Mr. Kelly's guitars, was having work done on his Bowery apartment and offered some of its wood to Mr. Kelly. Mr. Kelly built a guitar with it and was staggered by the results.
He expounded on the discovery at his workshop the other day, breaking from his peaceful demeanor into excited bursts.
“The sound was magic,” he said. “The Bowery gives it mystique. I call it the mystery of the molecule: how wood changes over the years and grows resonant.
“The whole city is built from this wood. They must have taken down every tree from here to the Adirondacks. I think about what the wood saw that we didn't see. They were these huge living things. People say they're dead, but to me they're still alive and I'm giving them a new life.”
“This stuff goes back to the primordial forest that covered the planet,” he said. “I would have loved to walk through it.”

