A grand jury decided on Thursday not to charge a Texas police officer who was shown on a cellphone video throwing a black teenage girl to the ground outside a pool party last year, the authorities said.
The footage of the white officer, Cpl. David Eric Casebolt, tackling the teenager in June 2015 was posted to YouTube, becoming part of a nationwide debate over how white officers treat African-Americans.
Tom Mills, a lawyer for Mr. Casebolt, who resigned from the McKinney Police Department in the wake of the encounter, said on Friday that the officer was “very relieved” by the grand jury’s decision.
Kim Cole, a lawyer for the girl’s family, said it intended to file civil rights and personal injury lawsuits, according to The Dallas Morning News.
Corporal Casebolt was among the officers who responded to a call about a disturbance about 7 p.m. that day at a community pool in a racially diverse subdivision north of Dallas.
The video showed him chasing some of the young party-goers, cursing at them and shouting for them to go home. Corporal Casebolt then approached the girl, Dajerria Becton, 15, and other teenagers and told them to leave. After she lingered, according to the footage, the corporal shoved her down onto the grass by the head, arms and neck, and yelled, “On your face!”
Ms. Becton ended up facedown and Corporal Casebolt placed both knees on her back. She cried and asked for her mother. Several people rushed toward Corporal Casebolt as he grabbed the girl, and he pulled out his handgun.
Ms. Becton was detained and later released to her parents, police officials said. One man was arrested on charges of interfering with the duties of a police officer and evading arrest, but the charges were later dismissed.
Corporal Casebolt’s lawyer at the time, Jane E. Bishkin, tried to explain the officer’s actions by saying that he had been under stress after responding to two earlier calls involving a suicide and a suicide attempt.
Investigators from the Texas Department of Public Safety looked into the case then turned it over to the Collin County district attorney’s office in January. On Thursday, the office presented the findings to a grand jury, which decided not to indict the officer, a police statement said.
McKinney, which has about 150,000 people, is a fast-growing, mostly middle-class suburb with deep racial and economic divisions. The pool party took place on the west side, in the Craig Ranch neighborhood, which residents said has had friendly relations among black, white, Hispanic and Asian residents.
After the announcement that the officer would not be charged, the Police Department invited residents to meet on June 27 for community-building talks intended to strengthen ties.
“The McKinney Police Department’s mission is to make the city a safe place to live, work and visit for everyone,” the department’s statement said. “In light of this, we seek to work in partnership with all who live and work in this great city.”

