Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social-media presences of celebrities.
It's comforting to think that the internet has a microscopic attention span, because it makes life easier to live: We can take unflattering photos, post slightly offensive tweets or, say, release a cloying, whiny pop-rock track about a woman we spotted on the subway, because the assumption is that the internet will forget: We are but specks in the universe, mere fodder in the content machine.
Sadly, that's not what happened to James Blunt.
A refresher: Blunt skyrocketed to fame after his 2005 hit “You're Beautiful” monopolized Top 40 stations across the country, until we heard his quivering voice so many times that swallowing bees seemed a more enjoyable option than listening to it again. But stopping wasn't an option: The song's ubiquity was unceasing. “You're Beautiful” was a promo song for “Desperate Housewives.” It played on teen soaps and “CSI” spinoffs; it was performed on “Saturday Night Live” (by him), “American Idol” (by someone else) and in an Adam Sandler movie (by Sandler himself). The critically acclaimed, Grammy-nominated single quickly became one of Rolling Stone's “Most Annoying Songs of All Time” and the pale, white butt of a Weird Al Yankovic joke ( “You're Pitiful”). Even Blunt felt remorse, admitting to Hello magazine in 2014 that it “was force-fed down people's throats.”
When we had the option to stop listening to Blunt, we did. His next single, “Goodbye My Lover,” didn't chart nearly as well. Not a single song on his second, third or fourth albums, the last of which he joined Twitter to promote, ever came close to the success of “You're Beautiful.” But we never opted out of tweeting him, even 10 years after the height of his fame.
We tweet lots of things at him: that he's shrill or annoying or that our day is ruined because we somehow were forced to endure his music. But Twitter's absolute favorite thing is to bring up a rhyme with his surname. The tweets vary in their colorful commentary, but in general, they all ridicule him for his last name.
(Here's the worst part: James Blunt's real name isn't even James Blunt. It's James Blount. He changed it because people kept pronouncing Blount like it rhymes with “mount,” instead of like it rhymes with “grunt.” Making it closer to its phonetic spelling, at the time, seemed like a good idea for his music career. Perhaps he did not realize what the switch would bring.)
Possibly overwhelmed by the lethal combination of overwhelming volume and dogged persistence, Blunt's stopped trying to end this derision and all the rest. He instead takes it mostly in stride. But sometimes, he can't control himself:
“@ooliviae: James Blunt is the rudest [expletive] on this earth, I [expletive] hate him.”
He fires back: “U're just a jealous runner-up in the Rudest [expletive] Competition.”
“James Blunt is so irritating,” said the user @chillyeol.
“Infectious too! Like herpes,” he answered.
Sometimes Blunt doesn't even need to be provoked — “Not even I think you're beautiful!” he tweeted out into the abyss in 2015 — nor does he require being tagged with an @. Mention his name, and like an internet boogeyman, he shall appear.
Celebrities “clapping back,” or defending themselves against a hater's insult with a better one, is an ongoing phenomenon. Gigi Hadid has done it. Drake has done it. Rihanna has done it. Even Smash Mouth has done it. They see people attacking their reputation, and they rush, sometimes fueled with anger, to protect it.
But Blunt's motivation isn't like that. It's not a struggle to change public opinion; he acknowledges in his Twitter bio that that's already past the point of no return. (“Proof that one song is all you need,” it reads.) His position is almost incredulity. Do we really think Blunt is what we paint him as: the pitiful loser? He's a multimillionaire. He considers Prince Harry and Ed Sheeran as close friends. He has houses in London and Ibiza. He just celebrated the birth of his first child with his wife, a British aristocrat and accomplished lawyer. James Blunt is doing better, much better, than most of us. Yet we can't we let go of this bizarre notion that, somehow, he must be awash in a tidal wave of his own-self pity.
When Blunt tweets back, he does so with the knowledge that we're the fools.
We used to let the people like him fade away peacefully, only ever acknowledging them on holiday-weekend marathons of VH1 retrospecials. But now, through social media, their failure and their legacy can live forever, moving forward while the event stays frozen in time, so that instead of it being a really cool and distant memory that someone once had a hit on the radio, it now becomes a course of shame.
With the anonymity of the internet, we can do much worse than just insult a song: We can bring a singer's career back from the grave (but haunted, in a post-“Pet Sematary” kind of way) with a meme, a tweet or a YouTube video. Most famously, Rick Astley was ripped out of retirement after “rick-rolling,” or the bait-and-switch act of secretly directing a link to the music video for “Never Gonna Give You Up” under the guise of something more salacious, became a phenomenon. Yes, he was brought back into the conversation, his career given a new life. His new album, released this year, reached the top spot on the British charts, his most popular work in 29 years. But his legacy was forever changed: No longer was he Rick Astley, the ‘80s British singer. He was Rick Astley, the dorky guy in the infuriating internet prank.
The faded celebrity is no longer allowed to disappear, even when, quite frankly, they should. We are Dr. Frankenstein, and Astley, Blunt and whoever else catches our eye is a cadaver that we can poke and prod until we can say, “It's alive!” Blunt has 1.1 million followers on Twitter, and they aren't all there because they like his music. They like the monster we've created: the soulful singer turned foul-mouthed social-media savage. And perhaps in participating, he's showing that he is in on the joke, which is the only recourse for someone who is the joke. James Blunt is 42. He has got a long way to go to figure out how to continue being James Blunt despite his one success that he allowed us to make into a failure.
After all, as @_idkmatilda asked, “Has James blunt done anything other than that one song in his whole career? ”
“Just that and a few super models,” Blunt replied.

