When the Philadelphia 76ers make the first pick in Thursday night’s N.B.A. draft, it will be seen by some cultish fans as vindication of the team’s yearslong strategy of being very, very bad in order to eventually become very, very good.
The 76ers represent the most brazen version of a strategy long embraced by struggling N.B.A. franchises: Lose a lot of games and secure one of the top picks in the draft in order to maximize the odds of landing a game-changing superstar. The “tanking” strategy, led by a general manager, Sam Hinkie, who resigned in April, has irritated a lot of people and inspired a lot of mockery.
But a contingent of Sixers fans, and some other admirers of the strategy, contend that Philadelphia had been stuck in mediocrity for a decade: a “treadmill” team too good to get a top pick but not good enough to make meaningful noise in the playoffs. They believe that a demolition would allow the team to draft a superstar who would be unlikely to sign with Philadelphia in free agency, and that time spent in the middle is simply a waste. (Full disclosure: I am one of those cultish Sixers fans.)
An analysis of championship teams since 2000 suggests the Sixers may not be totally crazy. Almost every team that has made the N.B.A. finals in that span has had a player selected in the Top 3 of the draft, and most of them had someone who was picked first.
Sure, it’s possible your team could sign a Top 3 player or acquire one in a trade, but most teams struggle to attract top players if they’re in a less-desirable market or don’t already have a core of talent in place. For most teams, the surest way to acquire a superstar is to draft one.
Of 17 championship teams since 2000:
■ 12 teams had a player selected with the No. 1 pick.
■ 14 teams had a player selected with a Top 2 pick.
■ 16 teams had a player selected with a Top 3 pick.
What about the teams that lost in the finals? The numbers are similar:
■ 11 teams had a player selected with the No. 1 pick.
■ 15 teams had a player selected with a Top 2 pick.
■ 16 teams had a player selected with a Top 3 pick.
The list of players picked in the Top 3 holds many of the franchise cornerstones that have dominated the N.B.A. LeBron James, Tim Duncan and Shaquille O’Neal have led their teams to multiple championships, while other teams are building around talent like Karl-Anthony Towns, Andrew Wiggins, Anthony Davis, John Wall, Blake Griffin, Kevin Durant, James Harden and Carmelo Anthony.
This year’s champions, the Cleveland Cavaliers, were led by James and another first overall pick, Kyrie Irving. That team also included Kevin Love, who was acquired by trading two first overall picks (Andrew Wiggins and Anthony Bennett).
It’s not just Top 3 players that define championship teams: Such teams are almost always stocked with players chosen at the top of the draft.
Since 2000, 12 of the 17 championship teams have had at least four players selected in the Top 13 picks — the so-called draft lottery. The only exceptions are four Duncan-led San Antonio Spurs championship seasons and the 2008 Boston Celtics, led by Kevin Garnett (drafted fifth), Ray Allen (fifth) and Paul Pierce (10th).
Having multiple Top 5 talents is equally important. Twelve of the 17 champions had two such players, the exceptions being three of the Spurs teams and two Los Angeles Lakers teams led by O’Neal (first pick) and Kobe Bryant (13th pick).
Yes, it is possible to have a team built on players drafted outside the Top 3 — it’s just much, much more unlikely. The Spurs have been built largely through non-lottery picks, but have been anchored by Tim Duncan, a first-overall pick.
Even the recent Golden State Warriors teams, led by Stephen Curry (seventh pick), Klay Thompson (11th pick) and Draymond Green (35th pick), had a first-overall pick, Andrew Bogut, playing a lot of minutes.
Those teams are typically built on later picks that turn into superstars like Curry and Kobe, but a disproportionate number of superstars still emerge from the top three slots in the draft. Tanking is no guaranteed tactic — no such thing exists — but it is an understandable one.

