Thousands of New York City residents who are H.I.V.-positive will become eligible for public assistance for housing, transportation and food under a significant expansion of a state program that some activists had feared was being delayed.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Thursday that low-income city residents who are H.I.V.-positive but asymptomatic would get the same assistance as low-income residents who show symptoms. About 6,500 to 7,000 additional people are expected to benefit from the expansion of the program, known as the H.I.V./AIDS Services Administration, or HASA, which now helps about 32,000 people.
The announcement came after what some advocates described as a series of broken promises by Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, to expand the program, fully administer a plan meant to end H.I.V. and AIDS in New York by 2020 and finance that plan. Jeremy Saunders, an executive director of VOCAL-NY, a nonprofit focused on helping low-income people with H.I.V. and AIDS, said activists had been frustrated by Mr. Cuomo’s failure to move forward on the expansion more quickly.
Advocates were preparing to pressure Mr. Cuomo just before New York City’s annual gay pride parade and festival this weekend. “We are thankful to the governor that he has finally taken this step forward after a hard-fought campaign,” Mr. Saunders said.
Alphonso David, the governor’s counsel, said that Mr. Cuomo had always been committed to expanding the HASA program’s benefits, but that he had had to find a way around a reluctant State Legislature. To broaden the program, Mr. Cuomo is simply modifying a longstanding social services policy that made a distinction between people who showed symptoms and those who did not, Mr. David said. “The governor took a very creative and important approach to provide services to all people who are living with H.I.V.,” he said.
The governor’s office said that the new policy would take effect in 60 days. But city officials are still awaiting the language, said Steven Banks, the city’s Social Services commissioner. “We added money to our budget a number of months ago to extend HASA to all clients with H.I.V., and we look forward to seeing the details of this new program so that we can make sure that it covers all the New York City residents with H.I.V. we have identified in need, and also provides the necessary resources,” Mr. Banks said in an interview.
Mr. Banks said the city had estimated that it would spend about $52 million in the first year of the program’s expansion and $89 million a year after that. Mr. David said the state had estimated its contribution would be about $31 million a year.
Under the program, the city’s Human Resources Administration helps participants who spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing by reimbursing them the difference. They also get money for transportation and food.
Advocates say that housing assistance is an effective way to help keep people with H.I.V. or AIDS from becoming homeless and from spreading the virus. “When people have a home, they are taking their medicine,” Mr. Saunders said.
Corey Johnson, a City Council member who is H.I.V.-positive, said that thousands of New Yorkers had not been getting help because “they weren’t sick enough.”
“This is going to help a lot of poor people,” Mr. Johnson, a Manhattan Democrat, said. He added that wealthy, white men often received better services than low-income, black women. “H.I.V. has really become a disease about poverty.”
Mr. Johnson praised Mr. Cuomo, though he said there had been disappointment when there was little obvious action after the governor announced his plans for the expansion, among other initiatives, on November 30, in recognition of World AIDS Day. “My understanding is that there wasn’t much appetite,” Mr. Johnson said, referring to the State Legislature. “The governor’s office was working hard.”
Kelsey Louie, chief executive of the Gay Men’s Health Crisis, said in a statement that his group was looking forward to helping the governor expand the HASA program. “The country and the world are watching what we are doing in New York,” he said, “and gratefully they see action on the part of our executive when our legislature falls short.”
The governor is likely to continue to feel pressure as advocates seek to bolster services outside New York City. “Advocates are always going to push the governor, but we view him as a friend,” said Anthony Hayes, vice president of public affairs and policy for the Gay Men’s Health Crisis. “There can always be more money and it can always happen faster.”

