When Ben Simmons steps on stage Thursday as (in all likelihood) the No. 1 pick in the N.B.A. draft, he will carry the expectation of stardom. But while being the No. 1 overall pick is the pinnacle for a new professional, it is far from a guarantee of success.
Here is a look at the best, and worst, No. 1s over the decades.
Best No. 1: Anthony Davis, 2012, New Orleans Hornets (now Pelicans). A three-time All-Star in his first four seasons, Davis has been a star offensively and defensively for the Pelicans, who happily signed him to a nine-figure contract extension last summer. Although a shoulder injury slowed him this past season, there are plenty of people who still see him as the league’s next big thing.
Successful No. 1s (in approximate order): Kyrie Irving, John Wall, Karl-Anthony Towns
Disappointing No. 1 (so far): Andrew Wiggins
Worst No. 1: Anthony Bennett, 2013, Cleveland Cavaliers. After a year at Nevada, Las Vegas, Bennett was snapped up by the Cavaliers, with whom he averaged 4.2 points per game. He was traded to Minnesota and then released, and he spent this past season playing for the Toronto Raptors (1.5 points a game) and the Delaware 87ers of the D-League. Toronto has given up on him, too, and he is now trying to help his native Canada qualify for the Olympics. Three years after he went No. 1, his future in the N.B.A. is uncertain.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Paul George was selected 10th behind John Wall and, among others, Evan Turner, Wesley Johnson and Ekpe Udoh in 2010. He had played two years at Fresno State, a low-profile program that had a losing record in each season. After coming back last year from a badly broken right leg, he averaged 23.1 points per game this season, made the All-Star team and led the Indiana Pacers back to the playoffs.
Best: LeBron James, 2003, Cavaliers. Chosen straight out of high school, James has, of course, more than justified his selection.
Successes: Dwight Howard, Blake Griffin, Derrick Rose, Yao Ming, Andrew Bogut, Kenyon Martin
Disappointments: Andrea Bargnani, Greg Oden
Worst: Kwame Brown, 2001, Washington Wizards. Like James, Brown was drafted straight out of high school. That is where the comparisons end. Brown managed to play more than a decade in the N.B.A. but only once averaged even 10 points a game. By most accounts, Michael Jordan, finishing his playing career with the Wizards, loved Brown before the draft but quickly soured on him once he got on the court. Brown made six more stops, last appearing in a game in 2013 not long before turning 30.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Stephen Curry. Guards who are 6 feet 3 inches and play three years at Davidson do not go No. 1, even if they average nearly 30 points a game. His scouting reports faulted his defense and tendency to shoot too much, not something the Golden State Warriors are currently complaining about. Curry went No. 7 over all in 2009, one spot behind Jonny Flynn, who played just three N.B.A. seasons.
Best: Shaquille O’Neal, 1992, Orlando Magic. A superstar in college, a sure thing at the draft and a superstar in the pros.
Successes: Tim Duncan, Allen Iverson, Chris Webber, Elton Brand, Larry Johnson
Disappointments: Derrick Coleman, Glenn Robinson, Joe Smith
Worst: Michael Olowokandi, 1998, Los Angeles Clippers. A native of Nigeria, he had played basketball only since he was 18, but the Clippers were entranced by his height (7-0) and potential. He was a competent pro for a few years, but stardom never came. Another 7-footer, Dirk Nowitzki, went No. 9.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Kobe Bryant, Charlotte Hornets (traded to Los Angeles Lakers), 1996. Drafted in an era when players straight out of high school, especially guards, were looked at dubiously, Bryant was taken at No. 13, after the likes of Samaki Walker and Todd Fuller.
Best: David Robinson, 1987, San Antonio Spurs. He was good enough for the Spurs to wait two years while he finished his Navy service. A Hall of Fame career followed.
Successes: Hakeem Olajuwon, Patrick Ewing, James Worthy, Danny Manning, Brad Daugherty, Mark Aguirre
Disappointments: Pervis Ellison, Ralph Sampson
Worst: Joe Barry Carroll, 1980, Warriors. Stardom at Purdue and the magic 7 at the start of his height listing led the Warriors to grab Carroll. He had a number of 20-point seasons and one All-Star selection, so he was not an epic bust. But a perceived apathetic attitude on court earned him the nickname Joe Barely Cares. The Warriors sent Robert Parish and a draft pick used on Kevin McHale to the Boston Celtics to acquire the pick used to take Carroll.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Michael Jordan. Few fault the Houston Rockets for taking the all-time great Hakeem Olajuwon at No. 1 in 1984. But Sam Bowie at No. 2, by the Portland Trail Blazers, is often considered the worst draft selection in history. The Bulls took Jordan at No. 3.
Best:Magic Johnson. He led Michigan State to a national title and was an easy No. 1 choice.
Successes: Bob Lanier, Bill Walton, David Thompson, Mychal Thompson, Doug Collins
Disappointments: John Lucas, Kent Benson, Austin Carr
Worst: LaRue Martin, 1972, Trail Blazers. As David Halberstam recounted in “The Breaks of the Game,” Portland decided to pass on Bob McAdoo, a future 30-point-a-game N.B.A. scorer, because he demanded a car. So the Blazers turned to the 6-11 LaRue Martin of Loyola-Chicago, hoping he would at least develop into a defensive star. Martin spent four years coming off the bench for Portland and then was out of the league.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Larry Bird. Because Bird briefly enrolled at Indiana before transferring to Indiana State, he was eligible for the draft after his junior season under the rules at the time. Boston was willing to wait a year, chose him at No. 6 in 1978 and then watched with pleasure as he won player of the year awards as a senior.
Best: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, 1969, Milwaukee Bucks. The N.B.A.’s career leader in points.
Successes: Oscar Robertson, Elvin Hayes, Walt Bellamy, Cazzie Russell, Jimmy Walker
Disappointments: Jim Barnes, Fred Hetzel, Art Heyman
Worst: Bill McGill, 1962, Chicago Zephyrs (now Wizards). A 6-9 center who was the national scoring leader while at Utah, he played with nine teams in five years in the N.B.A. and the A.B.A. and never really found a role.
He Didn’t Go No. 1? Jerry West. He could have gone No. 1 after a stellar career at West Virginia but found himself in the same draft as Robertson and went No. 2 instead.
Best: Elgin Baylor, 1958, Lakers. He played 14 seasons with the Lakers, 11 of them as an All-Star.
Successes: Bob Boozer, Hot Rod Hundley, Frank Selvy, Ray Felix
Disappointments: Si Green, Chuck Share, Dick Ricketts, Mark Workman
Worst: Gene Melchiorre, 1951, Baltimore Bullets. He was barred from the league for life for his role in a point-shaving scandal at Bradley before he ever played an N.B.A. game.
They Didn’t Go No. 1? Wilt Chamberlain and Bill Russell. Under the rules at the time, Chamberlain was eligible to be taken in 1959 as a so-called territorial pick by the Philadelphia Warriors because he was from the city. The No. 1 pick that year was Boozer. Russell was part of the regular draft in 1956, but Rochester chose Green instead, leaving Russell to go No. 2 to the St. Louis Hawks. They promptly traded him to the Celtics. Eleven N.B.A. titles followed.

