Residential towers made from glass and steel may fit the aesthetics of Midtown Manhattan, but if you're building a new structure near historic homes in brownstone Brooklyn, what kind of facade material would be contextual to the neighborhood?
The choice of the architect Randolph Gerner was exposed cast-in-place concrete — where concrete is brought to the site and set into molds. Mr. Gerner has such a passion for concrete that he has been studying the material's origin and has used the Vatican Apostolic Library for research.
Mr. Gerner has designed 10 buildings in New York using what is known as béton brut, or raw, unfinished concrete, as he is doing at the Waverly Brooklyn, a 48-unit condominium now going up in Clinton Hill.
“With exposed concrete, you can craft it so it has texture,” said Mr. Gerner, a principal of Gerner Kronick & Valcarcel Architects. “It can be chiseled or manipulated to how you want it to look, so it can be very decorative.”
The style is a nod to structures made by modernist architects like Paul Rudolph and I.M. Pei. At Waverly Brooklyn, a seven-story building, Mr. Gerner said the exterior will have exposed concrete pillars, which will also serve as frames for rows of gray brick.
“The concrete pillars are the structural columns that hold up the building,” but are “also the decorative exterior,” he said.
Concrete walls are considered energy efficient, because the material has high thermal mass, or ability to absorb and store heat. In certain cases, developers could get Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) points for building concrete exteriors.
The energy efficiency of concrete is certainly an advantage, but Andrew Bradfield, the building's developer, was attracted to the aesthetic.
“I like that Randy and his firm bring a European element to their designs,” said Mr. Bradfield, the principal of Orange Management. The Waverly Brooklyn, on the corner of Waverly Avenue and Fulton Street, is right outside the Clinton Hill Historic District, where many homes were built in the 1800s.
In addition, the neighborhood has mansions that are “unique, so each street has a different look,” Mr. Bradfield said.
The building, which is scheduled to be finished by the end of the year, will have studio to four-bedroom apartments, priced from $595,000 to about $2.4 million. There will be five penthouse units, including one penthouse duplex with four bedrooms. This is the developer's first large-scale residential project in the borough.
Amenities will include a parking garage with 32 automated and three conventional spaces and a second-floor terrace with outdoor grills and a dining area. The rooftop garden offers views of the Manhattan skyline and an outdoor shower.
“If you've ever taken a cool outdoor shower on a hot summer day, you'll know it's as refreshing as jumping in a pool,” Mr. Bradfield said.
Highlyann Krasnow, a partner of MNS, the real estate firm that is handling sales for the Waverly Brooklyn, noted that because so much of the area is designated a historic district, new condo construction is rare.
That is not the case south and west of Clinton Hill, where the build-out of Barclays Center and the Pacific Park complex has been a boon for retail on Atlantic Avenue, which will have an “inevitable transformation,” with more shops and restaurants, Mr. Bradfield said.
“I told investors that I saw Atlantic Avenue transforming like Court Street in Cobble Hill did years ago,” he said.
Sales for the building, which will also have one ground-floor retail space, are expected to start on Monday.

